LINE 1: "We cannot be far from the road of yellow brick, now," remarked the
LINE 2: Scarecrow, as he stood beside the girl, "for we have come nearly as far
LINE 3: as the river carried us away."
LINE 4: The Tin Woodman was about to reply when he heard a low growl, and
LINE 5: turning his head (which worked beautifully on hinges) he saw a strange
LINE 6: beast come bounding over the grass toward them. It was, indeed, a great
LINE 7: yellow Wildcat, and the Woodman thought it must be chasing something,
LINE 8: for its ears were lying close to its head and its mouth was wide open,
LINE 9: showing two rows of ugly teeth, while its red eyes glowed like balls of
LINE 10: fire. As it came nearer the Tin Woodman saw that running before the
LINE 11: beast was a little gray field mouse, and although he had no heart he
LINE 12: knew it was wrong for the Wildcat to try to kill such a pretty,
LINE 13: harmless creature.
LINE 14: So the Woodman raised his axe, and as the Wildcat ran by he gave it a
LINE 15: quick blow that cut the beast's head clean off from its body, and it
LINE 16: rolled over at his feet in two pieces.
LINE 17: The field mouse, now that it was freed from its enemy, stopped short;
LINE 18: and coming slowly up to the Woodman it said, in a squeaky little voice:
LINE 19: "Oh, thank you! Thank you ever so much for saving my life."
LINE 20: "Don't speak of it, I beg of you," replied the Woodman. "I have no
LINE 21: heart, you know, so I am careful to help all those who may need a
LINE 22: friend, even if it happens to be only a mouse."
LINE 23: "Only a mouse!" cried the little animal, indignantly. "Why, I am a
LINE 24: Queen—the Queen of all the Field Mice!"
LINE 25: "Oh, indeed," said the Woodman, making a bow.
LINE 26: "Therefore you have done a great deed, as well as a brave one, in
LINE 27: saving my life," added the Queen.
LINE 28: At that moment several mice were seen running up as fast as their
LINE 29: little legs could carry them, and when they saw their Queen they
LINE 30: exclaimed:
LINE 31: "Oh, your Majesty, we thought you would be killed! How did you manage
LINE 32: to escape the great Wildcat?" They all bowed so low to the little Queen
LINE 33: that they almost stood upon their heads.
LINE 34: "This funny tin man," she answered, "killed the Wildcat and saved my
LINE 35: life. So hereafter you must all serve him, and obey his slightest
LINE 36: wish."
LINE 37: "We will!" cried all the mice, in a shrill chorus. And then they
LINE 38: scampered in all directions, for Toto had awakened from his sleep, and
LINE 39: seeing all these mice around him he gave one bark of delight and jumped
LINE 40: right into the middle of the group. Toto had always loved to chase mice
LINE 41: when he lived in Kansas, and he saw no harm in it.
LINE 42: But the Tin Woodman caught the dog in his arms and held him tight,
LINE 43: while he called to the mice, "Come back! Come back! Toto shall not hurt
LINE 44: you."
LINE 45: At this the Queen of the Mice stuck her head out from underneath a
LINE 46: clump of grass and asked, in a timid voice, "Are you sure he will not
LINE 47: bite us?"
LINE 48: "I will not let him," said the Woodman; "so do not be afraid."
LINE 49: One by one the mice came creeping back, and Toto did not bark again,
LINE 50: although he tried to get out of the Woodman's arms, and would have
LINE 51: bitten him had he not known very well he was made of tin. Finally one
LINE 52: of the biggest mice spoke.
LINE 53: "Is there anything we can do," it asked, "to repay you for saving the
LINE 54: life of our Queen?"
LINE 55: "Nothing that I know of," answered the Woodman; but the Scarecrow, who
LINE 56: had been trying to think, but could not because his head was stuffed
LINE 57: with straw, said, quickly, "Oh, yes; you can save our friend, the
LINE 58: Cowardly Lion, who is asleep in the poppy bed."
LINE 59: "A Lion!" cried the little Queen. "Why, he would eat us all up."
LINE 60: "Oh, no," declared the Scarecrow; "this Lion is a coward."
LINE 61: "Really?" asked the Mouse.
LINE 62: "He says so himself," answered the Scarecrow, "and he would never hurt
LINE 63: anyone who is our friend. If you will help us to save him I promise
LINE 64: that he shall treat you all with kindness."
LINE 65: "Very well," said the Queen, "we trust you. But what shall we do?"
LINE 66: "Are there many of these mice which call you Queen and are willing to
LINE 67: obey you?"
LINE 68: "Oh, yes; there are thousands," she replied.
LINE 69: "Then send for them all to come here as soon as possible, and let each
LINE 70: one bring a long piece of string."
LINE 71: The Queen turned to the mice that attended her and told them to go at
LINE 72: once and get all her people. As soon as they heard her orders they ran
LINE 73: away in every direction as fast as possible.
LINE 74: "Now," said the Scarecrow to the Tin Woodman, "you must go to those
LINE 75: trees by the riverside and make a truck that will carry the Lion."
LINE 76: So the Woodman went at once to the trees and began to work; and he soon
LINE 77: made a truck out of the limbs of trees, from which he chopped away all
LINE 78: the leaves and branches. He fastened it together with wooden pegs and
LINE 79: made the four wheels out of short pieces of a big tree trunk. So fast
LINE 80: and so well did he work that by the time the mice began to arrive the
LINE 81: truck was all ready for them.
LINE 82: They came from all directions, and there were thousands of them: big
LINE 83: mice and little mice and middle-sized mice; and each one brought a
LINE 84: piece of string in his mouth. It was about this time that Dorothy woke
LINE 85: from her long sleep and opened her eyes. She was greatly astonished to
LINE 86: find herself lying upon the grass, with thousands of mice standing
LINE 87: around and looking at her timidly. But the Scarecrow told her about
LINE 88: everything, and turning to the dignified little Mouse, he said:
LINE 89: "Permit me to introduce to you her Majesty, the Queen."
LINE 90: Dorothy nodded gravely and the Queen made a curtsy, after which she
LINE 91: became quite friendly with the little girl.
LINE 92: The Scarecrow and the Woodman now began to fasten the mice to the
LINE 93: truck, using the strings they had brought. One end of a string was tied
LINE 94: around the neck of each mouse and the other end to the truck. Of course
LINE 95: the truck was a thousand times bigger than any of the mice who were to
LINE 96: draw it; but when all the mice had been harnessed, they were able to
LINE 97: pull it quite easily. Even the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman could sit
LINE 98: on it, and were drawn swiftly by their queer little horses to the place
LINE 99: where the Lion lay asleep.
LINE 100: After a great deal of hard work, for the Lion was heavy, they managed
LINE 101: to get him up on the truck. Then the Queen hurriedly gave her people
LINE 102: the order to start, for she feared if the mice stayed among the poppies
LINE 103: too long they also would fall asleep.
LINE 104: At first the little creatures, many though they were, could hardly stir
LINE 105: the heavily loaded truck; but the Woodman and the Scarecrow both pushed
LINE 106: from behind, and they got along better. Soon they rolled the Lion out
LINE 107: of the poppy bed to the green fields, where he could breathe the sweet,
LINE 108: fresh air again, instead of the poisonous scent of the flowers.
LINE 109: Dorothy came to meet them and thanked the little mice warmly for saving
LINE 110: her companion from death. She had grown so fond of the big Lion she was
LINE 111: glad he had been rescued.
LINE 112: Then the mice were unharnessed from the truck and scampered away
LINE 113: through the grass to their homes. The Queen of the Mice was the last to
LINE 114: leave.
LINE 115: "If ever you need us again," she said, "come out into the field and
LINE 116: call, and we shall hear you and come to your assistance. Good-bye!"
LINE 117: "Good-bye!" they all answered, and away the Queen ran, while Dorothy
LINE 118: held Toto tightly lest he should run after her and frighten her.
LINE 119: After this they sat down beside the Lion until he should awaken; and
LINE 120: the Scarecrow brought Dorothy some fruit from a tree near by, which she
LINE 121: ate for her dinner.