LINE 1: The four travelers passed through the rest of the forest in safety, and
LINE 2: when they came out from its gloom saw before them a steep hill, covered
LINE 3: from top to bottom with great pieces of rock.
LINE 4: "That will be a hard climb," said the Scarecrow, "but we must get over
LINE 5: the hill, nevertheless."
LINE 6: So he led the way and the others followed. They had nearly reached the
LINE 7: first rock when they heard a rough voice cry out, "Keep back!"
LINE 8: "Who are you?" asked the Scarecrow.
LINE 9: Then a head showed itself over the rock and the same voice said, "This
LINE 10: hill belongs to us, and we don't allow anyone to cross it."
LINE 11: "But we must cross it," said the Scarecrow. "We're going to the country
LINE 12: of the Quadlings."
LINE 13: "But you shall not!" replied the voice, and there stepped from behind
LINE 14: the rock the strangest man the travelers had ever seen.
LINE 15: He was quite short and stout and had a big head, which was flat at the
LINE 16: top and supported by a thick neck full of wrinkles. But he had no arms
LINE 17: at all, and, seeing this, the Scarecrow did not fear that so helpless a
LINE 18: creature could prevent them from climbing the hill. So he said, "I'm
LINE 19: sorry not to do as you wish, but we must pass over your hill whether
LINE 20: you like it or not," and he walked boldly forward.
LINE 21: As quick as lightning the man's head shot forward and his neck
LINE 22: stretched out until the top of the head, where it was flat, struck the
LINE 23: Scarecrow in the middle and sent him tumbling, over and over, down the
LINE 24: hill. Almost as quickly as it came the head went back to the body, and
LINE 25: the man laughed harshly as he said, "It isn't as easy as you think!"
LINE 26: A chorus of boisterous laughter came from the other rocks, and Dorothy
LINE 27: saw hundreds of the armless Hammer-Heads upon the hillside, one behind
LINE 28: every rock.
LINE 29: The Lion became quite angry at the laughter caused by the Scarecrow's
LINE 30: mishap, and giving a loud roar that echoed like thunder, he dashed up
LINE 31: the hill.
LINE 32: Again a head shot swiftly out, and the great Lion went rolling down the
LINE 33: hill as if he had been struck by a cannon ball.
LINE 34: Dorothy ran down and helped the Scarecrow to his feet, and the Lion
LINE 35: came up to her, feeling rather bruised and sore, and said, "It is
LINE 36: useless to fight people with shooting heads; no one can withstand
LINE 37: them."
LINE 38: "What can we do, then?" she asked.
LINE 39: "Call the Winged Monkeys," suggested the Tin Woodman. "You have still
LINE 40: the right to command them once more."
LINE 41: "Very well," she answered, and putting on the Golden Cap she uttered
LINE 42: the magic words. The Monkeys were as prompt as ever, and in a few
LINE 43: moments the entire band stood before her.
LINE 44: "What are your commands?" inquired the King of the Monkeys, bowing low.
LINE 45: "Carry us over the hill to the country of the Quadlings," answered the
LINE 46: girl.
LINE 47: "It shall be done," said the King, and at once the Winged Monkeys
LINE 48: caught the four travelers and Toto up in their arms and flew away with
LINE 49: them. As they passed over the hill the Hammer-Heads yelled with
LINE 50: vexation, and shot their heads high in the air, but they could not
LINE 51: reach the Winged Monkeys, which carried Dorothy and her comrades safely
LINE 52: over the hill and set them down in the beautiful country of the
LINE 53: Quadlings.
LINE 54: "This is the last time you can summon us," said the leader to Dorothy;
LINE 55: "so good-bye and good luck to you."
LINE 56: "Good-bye, and thank you very much," returned the girl; and the Monkeys
LINE 57: rose into the air and were out of sight in a twinkling.
LINE 58: The country of the Quadlings seemed rich and happy. There was field
LINE 59: upon field of ripening grain, with well-paved roads running between,
LINE 60: and pretty rippling brooks with strong bridges across them. The fences
LINE 61: and houses and bridges were all painted bright red, just as they had
LINE 62: been painted yellow in the country of the Winkies and blue in the
LINE 63: country of the Munchkins. The Quadlings themselves, who were short and
LINE 64: fat and looked chubby and good-natured, were dressed all in red, which
LINE 65: showed bright against the green grass and the yellowing grain.
LINE 66: The Monkeys had set them down near a farmhouse, and the four travelers
LINE 67: walked up to it and knocked at the door. It was opened by the farmer's
LINE 68: wife, and when Dorothy asked for something to eat the woman gave them
LINE 69: all a good dinner, with three kinds of cake and four kinds of cookies,
LINE 70: and a bowl of milk for Toto.
LINE 71: "How far is it to the Castle of Glinda?" asked the child.
LINE 72: "It is not a great way," answered the farmer's wife. "Take the road to
LINE 73: the South and you will soon reach it."
LINE 74: Thanking the good woman, they started afresh and walked by the fields
LINE 75: and across the pretty bridges until they saw before them a very
LINE 76: beautiful Castle. Before the gates were three young girls, dressed in
LINE 77: handsome red uniforms trimmed with gold braid; and as Dorothy
LINE 78: approached, one of them said to her:
LINE 79: "Why have you come to the South Country?"
LINE 80: "To see the Good Witch who rules here," she answered. "Will you take me
LINE 81: to her?"
LINE 82: "Let me have your name, and I will ask Glinda if she will receive you."
LINE 83: They told who they were, and the girl soldier went into the Castle.
LINE 84: After a few moments she came back to say that Dorothy and the others
LINE 85: were to be admitted at once.