LINE 1: All this time Dorothy and her companions had been walking through the
LINE 2: thick woods. The road was still paved with yellow brick, but these were
LINE 3: much covered by dried branches and dead leaves from the trees, and the
LINE 4: walking was not at all good.
LINE 5: There were few birds in this part of the forest, for birds love the
LINE 6: open country where there is plenty of sunshine. But now and then there
LINE 7: came a deep growl from some wild animal hidden among the trees. These
LINE 8: sounds made the little girl's heart beat fast, for she did not know
LINE 9: what made them; but Toto knew, and he walked close to Dorothy's side,
LINE 10: and did not even bark in return.
LINE 11: "How long will it be," the child asked of the Tin Woodman, "before we
LINE 12: are out of the forest?"
LINE 13: "I cannot tell," was the answer, "for I have never been to the Emerald
LINE 14: City. But my father went there once, when I was a boy, and he said it
LINE 15: was a long journey through a dangerous country, although nearer to the
LINE 16: city where Oz dwells the country is beautiful. But I am not afraid so
LINE 17: long as I have my oil-can, and nothing can hurt the Scarecrow, while
LINE 18: you bear upon your forehead the mark of the Good Witch's kiss, and that
LINE 19: will protect you from harm."
LINE 20: "But Toto!" said the girl anxiously. "What will protect him?"
LINE 21: "We must protect him ourselves if he is in danger," replied the Tin
LINE 22: Woodman.
LINE 23: Just as he spoke there came from the forest a terrible roar, and the
LINE 24: next moment a great Lion bounded into the road. With one blow of his
LINE 25: paw he sent the Scarecrow spinning over and over to the edge of the
LINE 26: road, and then he struck at the Tin Woodman with his sharp claws. But,
LINE 27: to the Lion's surprise, he could make no impression on the tin,
LINE 28: although the Woodman fell over in the road and lay still.
LINE 29: Little Toto, now that he had an enemy to face, ran barking toward the
LINE 30: Lion, and the great beast had opened his mouth to bite the dog, when
LINE 31: Dorothy, fearing Toto would be killed, and heedless of danger, rushed
LINE 32: forward and slapped the Lion upon his nose as hard as she could, while
LINE 33: she cried out:
LINE 34: "Don't you dare to bite Toto! You ought to be ashamed of yourself, a
LINE 35: big beast like you, to bite a poor little dog!"
LINE 36: "I didn't bite him," said the Lion, as he rubbed his nose with his paw
LINE 37: where Dorothy had hit it.
LINE 38: "No, but you tried to," she retorted. "You are nothing but a big
LINE 39: coward."
LINE 40: "I know it," said the Lion, hanging his head in shame. "I've always
LINE 41: known it. But how can I help it?"
LINE 42: "I don't know, I'm sure. To think of your striking a stuffed man, like
LINE 43: the poor Scarecrow!"
LINE 44: "Is he stuffed?" asked the Lion in surprise, as he watched her pick up
LINE 45: the Scarecrow and set him upon his feet, while she patted him into
LINE 46: shape again.
LINE 47: "Of course he's stuffed," replied Dorothy, who was still angry.
LINE 48: "That's why he went over so easily," remarked the Lion. "It astonished
LINE 49: me to see him whirl around so. Is the other one stuffed also?"
LINE 50: "No," said Dorothy, "he's made of tin." And she helped the Woodman up
LINE 51: again.
LINE 52: "That's why he nearly blunted my claws," said the Lion. "When they
LINE 53: scratched against the tin it made a cold shiver run down my back. What
LINE 54: is that little animal you are so tender of?"
LINE 55: "He is my dog, Toto," answered Dorothy.
LINE 56: "Is he made of tin, or stuffed?" asked the Lion.
LINE 57: "Neither. He's a—a—a meat dog," said the girl.
LINE 58: "Oh! He's a curious animal and seems remarkably small, now that I look
LINE 59: at him. No one would think of biting such a little thing, except a
LINE 60: coward like me," continued the Lion sadly.
LINE 61: "What makes you a coward?" asked Dorothy, looking at the great beast in
LINE 62: wonder, for he was as big as a small horse.
LINE 63: "It's a mystery," replied the Lion. "I suppose I was born that way. All
LINE 64: the other animals in the forest naturally expect me to be brave, for
LINE 65: the Lion is everywhere thought to be the King of Beasts. I learned that
LINE 66: if I roared very loudly every living thing was frightened and got out
LINE 67: of my way. Whenever I've met a man I've been awfully scared; but I just
LINE 68: roared at him, and he has always run away as fast as he could go. If
LINE 69: the elephants and the tigers and the bears had ever tried to fight me,
LINE 70: I should have run myself—I'm such a coward; but just as soon as they
LINE 71: hear me roar they all try to get away from me, and of course I let them
LINE 72: go."
LINE 73: "But that isn't right. The King of Beasts shouldn't be a coward," said
LINE 74: the Scarecrow.
LINE 75: "I know it," returned the Lion, wiping a tear from his eye with the tip
LINE 76: of his tail. "It is my great sorrow, and makes my life very unhappy.
LINE 77: But whenever there is danger, my heart begins to beat fast."
LINE 78: "Perhaps you have heart disease," said the Tin Woodman.
LINE 79: "It may be," said the Lion.
LINE 80: "If you have," continued the Tin Woodman, "you ought to be glad, for it
LINE 81: proves you have a heart. For my part, I have no heart; so I cannot have
LINE 82: heart disease."
LINE 83: "Perhaps," said the Lion thoughtfully, "if I had no heart I should not
LINE 84: be a coward."
LINE 85: "Have you brains?" asked the Scarecrow.
LINE 86: "I suppose so. I've never looked to see," replied the Lion.
LINE 87: "I am going to the Great Oz to ask him to give me some," remarked the
LINE 88: Scarecrow, "for my head is stuffed with straw."
LINE 89: "And I am going to ask him to give me a heart," said the Woodman.
LINE 90: "And I am going to ask him to send Toto and me back to Kansas," added
LINE 91: Dorothy.
LINE 92: "Do you think Oz could give me courage?" asked the Cowardly Lion.
LINE 93: "Just as easily as he could give me brains," said the Scarecrow.
LINE 94: "Or give me a heart," said the Tin Woodman.
LINE 95: "Or send me back to Kansas," said Dorothy.
LINE 96: "Then, if you don't mind, I'll go with you," said the Lion, "for my
LINE 97: life is simply unbearable without a bit of courage."
LINE 98: "You will be very welcome," answered Dorothy, "for you will help to
LINE 99: keep away the other wild beasts. It seems to me they must be more
LINE 100: cowardly than you are if they allow you to scare them so easily."
LINE 101: "They really are," said the Lion, "but that doesn't make me any braver,
LINE 102: and as long as I know myself to be a coward I shall be unhappy."
LINE 103: So once more the little company set off upon the journey, the Lion
LINE 104: walking with stately strides at Dorothy's side. Toto did not approve of
LINE 105: this new comrade at first, for he could not forget how nearly he had
LINE 106: been crushed between the Lion's great jaws. But after a time he became
LINE 107: more at ease, and presently Toto and the Cowardly Lion had grown to be
LINE 108: good friends.
LINE 109: During the rest of that day there was no other adventure to mar the
LINE 110: peace of their journey. Once, indeed, the Tin Woodman stepped upon a
LINE 111: beetle that was crawling along the road, and killed the poor little
LINE 112: thing. This made the Tin Woodman very unhappy, for he was always
LINE 113: careful not to hurt any living creature; and as he walked along he wept
LINE 114: several tears of sorrow and regret. These tears ran slowly down his
LINE 115: face and over the hinges of his jaw, and there they rusted. When
LINE 116: Dorothy presently asked him a question the Tin Woodman could not open
LINE 117: his mouth, for his jaws were tightly rusted together. He became greatly
LINE 118: frightened at this and made many motions to Dorothy to relieve him, but
LINE 119: she could not understand. The Lion was also puzzled to know what was
LINE 120: wrong. But the Scarecrow seized the oil-can from Dorothy's basket and
LINE 121: oiled the Woodman's jaws, so that after a few moments he could talk as
LINE 122: well as before.
LINE 123: "This will serve me a lesson," said he, "to look where I step. For if I
LINE 124: should kill another bug or beetle I should surely cry again, and crying
LINE 125: rusts my jaws so that I cannot speak."
LINE 126: Thereafter he walked very carefully, with his eyes on the road, and
LINE 127: when he saw a tiny ant toiling by he would step over it, so as not to
LINE 128: harm it. The Tin Woodman knew very well he had no heart, and therefore
LINE 129: he took great care never to be cruel or unkind to anything.
LINE 130: "You people with hearts," he said, "have something to guide you, and
LINE 131: need never do wrong; but I have no heart, and so I must be very
LINE 132: careful. When Oz gives me a heart of course I needn't mind so much."