LINE 1: After climbing down from the china wall the travelers found themselves
LINE 2: in a disagreeable country, full of bogs and marshes and covered with
LINE 3: tall, rank grass. It was difficult to walk without falling into muddy
LINE 4: holes, for the grass was so thick that it hid them from sight. However,
LINE 5: by carefully picking their way, they got safely along until they
LINE 6: reached solid ground. But here the country seemed wilder than ever, and
LINE 7: after a long and tiresome walk through the underbrush they entered
LINE 8: another forest, where the trees were bigger and older than any they had
LINE 9: ever seen.
LINE 10: "This forest is perfectly delightful," declared the Lion, looking
LINE 11: around him with joy. "Never have I seen a more beautiful place."
LINE 12: "It seems gloomy," said the Scarecrow.
LINE 13: "Not a bit of it," answered the Lion. "I should like to live here all
LINE 14: my life. See how soft the dried leaves are under your feet and how rich
LINE 15: and green the moss is that clings to these old trees. Surely no wild
LINE 16: beast could wish a pleasanter home."
LINE 17: "Perhaps there are wild beasts in the forest now," said Dorothy.
LINE 18: "I suppose there are," returned the Lion, "but I do not see any of them
LINE 19: about."
LINE 20: They walked through the forest until it became too dark to go any
LINE 21: farther. Dorothy and Toto and the Lion lay down to sleep, while the
LINE 22: Woodman and the Scarecrow kept watch over them as usual.
LINE 23: When morning came, they started again. Before they had gone far they
LINE 24: heard a low rumble, as of the growling of many wild animals. Toto
LINE 25: whimpered a little, but none of the others was frightened, and they
LINE 26: kept along the well-trodden path until they came to an opening in the
LINE 27: wood, in which were gathered hundreds of beasts of every variety. There
LINE 28: were tigers and elephants and bears and wolves and foxes and all the
LINE 29: others in the natural history, and for a moment Dorothy was afraid. But
LINE 30: the Lion explained that the animals were holding a meeting, and he
LINE 31: judged by their snarling and growling that they were in great trouble.
LINE 32: As he spoke several of the beasts caught sight of him, and at once the
LINE 33: great assemblage hushed as if by magic. The biggest of the tigers came
LINE 34: up to the Lion and bowed, saying:
LINE 35: "Welcome, O King of Beasts! You have come in good time to fight our
LINE 36: enemy and bring peace to all the animals of the forest once more."
LINE 37: "What is your trouble?" asked the Lion quietly.
LINE 38: "We are all threatened," answered the tiger, "by a fierce enemy which
LINE 39: has lately come into this forest. It is a most tremendous monster, like
LINE 40: a great spider, with a body as big as an elephant and legs as long as a
LINE 41: tree trunk. It has eight of these long legs, and as the monster crawls
LINE 42: through the forest he seizes an animal with a leg and drags it to his
LINE 43: mouth, where he eats it as a spider does a fly. Not one of us is safe
LINE 44: while this fierce creature is alive, and we had called a meeting to
LINE 45: decide how to take care of ourselves when you came among us."
LINE 46: The Lion thought for a moment.
LINE 47: "Are there any other lions in this forest?" he asked.
LINE 48: "No; there were some, but the monster has eaten them all. And, besides,
LINE 49: they were none of them nearly so large and brave as you."
LINE 50: "If I put an end to your enemy, will you bow down to me and obey me as
LINE 51: King of the Forest?" inquired the Lion.
LINE 52: "We will do that gladly," returned the tiger; and all the other beasts
LINE 53: roared with a mighty roar: "We will!"
LINE 54: "Where is this great spider of yours now?" asked the Lion.
LINE 55: "Yonder, among the oak trees," said the tiger, pointing with his
LINE 56: forefoot.
LINE 57: "Take good care of these friends of mine," said the Lion, "and I will
LINE 58: go at once to fight the monster."
LINE 59: He bade his comrades good-bye and marched proudly away to do battle
LINE 60: with the enemy.
LINE 61: The great spider was lying asleep when the Lion found him, and it
LINE 62: looked so ugly that its foe turned up his nose in disgust. Its legs
LINE 63: were quite as long as the tiger had said, and its body covered with
LINE 64: coarse black hair. It had a great mouth, with a row of sharp teeth a
LINE 65: foot long; but its head was joined to the pudgy body by a neck as
LINE 66: slender as a wasp's waist. This gave the Lion a hint of the best way to
LINE 67: attack the creature, and as he knew it was easier to fight it asleep
LINE 68: than awake, he gave a great spring and landed directly upon the
LINE 69: monster's back. Then, with one blow of his heavy paw, all armed with
LINE 70: sharp claws, he knocked the spider's head from its body. Jumping down,
LINE 71: he watched it until the long legs stopped wiggling, when he knew it was
LINE 72: quite dead.
LINE 73: The Lion went back to the opening where the beasts of the forest were
LINE 74: waiting for him and said proudly:
LINE 75: "You need fear your enemy no longer."
LINE 76: Then the beasts bowed down to the Lion as their King, and he promised
LINE 77: to come back and rule over them as soon as Dorothy was safely on her
LINE 78: way to Kansas.