LINE 1: Before they went to see Glinda, however, they were taken to a room of
LINE 2: the Castle, where Dorothy washed her face and combed her hair, and the
LINE 3: Lion shook the dust out of his mane, and the Scarecrow patted himself
LINE 4: into his best shape, and the Woodman polished his tin and oiled his
LINE 5: joints.
LINE 6: When they were all quite presentable they followed the soldier girl
LINE 7: into a big room where the Witch Glinda sat upon a throne of rubies.
LINE 8: She was both beautiful and young to their eyes. Her hair was a rich red
LINE 9: in color and fell in flowing ringlets over her shoulders. Her dress was
LINE 10: pure white but her eyes were blue, and they looked kindly upon the
LINE 11: little girl.
LINE 12: "What can I do for you, my child?" she asked.
LINE 13: Dorothy told the Witch all her story: how the cyclone had brought her
LINE 14: to the Land of Oz, how she had found her companions, and of the
LINE 15: wonderful adventures they had met with.
LINE 16: "My greatest wish now," she added, "is to get back to Kansas, for Aunt
LINE 17: Em will surely think something dreadful has happened to me, and that
LINE 18: will make her put on mourning; and unless the crops are better this
LINE 19: year than they were last, I am sure Uncle Henry cannot afford it."
LINE 20: Glinda leaned forward and kissed the sweet, upturned face of the loving
LINE 21: little girl.
LINE 22: "Bless your dear heart," she said, "I am sure I can tell you of a way
LINE 23: to get back to Kansas." Then she added, "But, if I do, you must give me
LINE 24: the Golden Cap."
LINE 25: "Willingly!" exclaimed Dorothy; "indeed, it is of no use to me now, and
LINE 26: when you have it you can command the Winged Monkeys three times."
LINE 27: "And I think I shall need their service just those three times,"
LINE 28: answered Glinda, smiling.
LINE 29: Dorothy then gave her the Golden Cap, and the Witch said to the
LINE 30: Scarecrow, "What will you do when Dorothy has left us?"
LINE 31: "I will return to the Emerald City," he replied, "for Oz has made me
LINE 32: its ruler and the people like me. The only thing that worries me is how
LINE 33: to cross the hill of the Hammer-Heads."
LINE 34: "By means of the Golden Cap I shall command the Winged Monkeys to carry
LINE 35: you to the gates of the Emerald City," said Glinda, "for it would be a
LINE 36: shame to deprive the people of so wonderful a ruler."
LINE 37: "Am I really wonderful?" asked the Scarecrow.
LINE 38: "You are unusual," replied Glinda.
LINE 39: Turning to the Tin Woodman, she asked, "What will become of you when
LINE 40: Dorothy leaves this country?"
LINE 41: He leaned on his axe and thought a moment. Then he said, "The Winkies
LINE 42: were very kind to me, and wanted me to rule over them after the Wicked
LINE 43: Witch died. I am fond of the Winkies, and if I could get back again to
LINE 44: the Country of the West, I should like nothing better than to rule over
LINE 45: them forever."
LINE 46: "My second command to the Winged Monkeys," said Glinda "will be that
LINE 47: they carry you safely to the land of the Winkies. Your brain may not be
LINE 48: so large to look at as those of the Scarecrow, but you are really
LINE 49: brighter than he is—when you are well polished—and I am sure you will
LINE 50: rule the Winkies wisely and well."
LINE 51: Then the Witch looked at the big, shaggy Lion and asked, "When Dorothy
LINE 52: has returned to her own home, what will become of you?"
LINE 53: "Over the hill of the Hammer-Heads," he answered, "lies a grand old
LINE 54: forest, and all the beasts that live there have made me their King. If
LINE 55: I could only get back to this forest, I would pass my life very happily
LINE 56: there."
LINE 57: "My third command to the Winged Monkeys," said Glinda, "shall be to
LINE 58: carry you to your forest. Then, having used up the powers of the Golden
LINE 59: Cap, I shall give it to the King of the Monkeys, that he and his band
LINE 60: may thereafter be free for evermore."
LINE 61: The Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman and the Lion now thanked the Good
LINE 62: Witch earnestly for her kindness; and Dorothy exclaimed:
LINE 63: "You are certainly as good as you are beautiful! But you have not yet
LINE 64: told me how to get back to Kansas."
LINE 65: "Your Silver Shoes will carry you over the desert," replied Glinda. "If
LINE 66: you had known their power you could have gone back to your Aunt Em the
LINE 67: very first day you came to this country."
LINE 68: "But then I should not have had my wonderful brains!" cried the
LINE 69: Scarecrow. "I might have passed my whole life in the farmer's
LINE 70: cornfield."
LINE 71: "And I should not have had my lovely heart," said the Tin Woodman. "I
LINE 72: might have stood and rusted in the forest till the end of the world."
LINE 73: "And I should have lived a coward forever," declared the Lion, "and no
LINE 74: beast in all the forest would have had a good word to say to me."
LINE 75: "This is all true," said Dorothy, "and I am glad I was of use to these
LINE 76: good friends. But now that each of them has had what he most desired,
LINE 77: and each is happy in having a kingdom to rule besides, I think I should
LINE 78: like to go back to Kansas."
LINE 79: "The Silver Shoes," said the Good Witch, "have wonderful powers. And
LINE 80: one of the most curious things about them is that they can carry you to
LINE 81: any place in the world in three steps, and each step will be made in
LINE 82: the wink of an eye. All you have to do is to knock the heels together
LINE 83: three times and command the shoes to carry you wherever you wish to
LINE 84: go."
LINE 85: "If that is so," said the child joyfully, "I will ask them to carry me
LINE 86: back to Kansas at once."
LINE 87: She threw her arms around the Lion's neck and kissed him, patting his
LINE 88: big head tenderly. Then she kissed the Tin Woodman, who was weeping in
LINE 89: a way most dangerous to his joints. But she hugged the soft, stuffed
LINE 90: body of the Scarecrow in her arms instead of kissing his painted face,
LINE 91: and found she was crying herself at this sorrowful parting from her
LINE 92: loving comrades.
LINE 93: Glinda the Good stepped down from her ruby throne to give the little
LINE 94: girl a good-bye kiss, and Dorothy thanked her for all the kindness she
LINE 95: had shown to her friends and herself.
LINE 96: Dorothy now took Toto up solemnly in her arms, and having said one last
LINE 97: good-bye she clapped the heels of her shoes together three times,
LINE 98: saying:
LINE 99: "Take me home to Aunt Em!"
LINE 100: Instantly she was whirling through the air, so swiftly that all she
LINE 101: could see or feel was the wind whistling past her ears.
LINE 102: The Silver Shoes took but three steps, and then she stopped so suddenly
LINE 103: that she rolled over upon the grass several times before she knew where
LINE 104: she was.
LINE 105: At length, however, she sat up and looked about her.
LINE 106: "Good gracious!" she cried.
LINE 107: For she was sitting on the broad Kansas prairie, and just before her
LINE 108: was the new farmhouse Uncle Henry built after the cyclone had carried
LINE 109: away the old one. Uncle Henry was milking the cows in the barnyard, and
LINE 110: Toto had jumped out of her arms and was running toward the barn,
LINE 111: barking furiously.
LINE 112: Dorothy stood up and found she was in her stocking-feet. For the Silver
LINE 113: Shoes had fallen off in her flight through the air, and were lost
LINE 114: forever in the desert.