LINE 1: The Cowardly Lion was much pleased to hear that the Wicked Witch had
LINE 2: been melted by a bucket of water, and Dorothy at once unlocked the gate
LINE 3: of his prison and set him free. They went in together to the castle,
LINE 4: where Dorothy's first act was to call all the Winkies together and tell
LINE 5: them that they were no longer slaves.
LINE 6: There was great rejoicing among the yellow Winkies, for they had been
LINE 7: made to work hard during many years for the Wicked Witch, who had
LINE 8: always treated them with great cruelty. They kept this day as a
LINE 9: holiday, then and ever after, and spent the time in feasting and
LINE 10: dancing.
LINE 11: "If our friends, the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman, were only with us,"
LINE 12: said the Lion, "I should be quite happy."
LINE 13: "Don't you suppose we could rescue them?" asked the girl anxiously.
LINE 14: "We can try," answered the Lion.
LINE 15: So they called the yellow Winkies and asked them if they would help to
LINE 16: rescue their friends, and the Winkies said that they would be delighted
LINE 17: to do all in their power for Dorothy, who had set them free from
LINE 18: bondage. So she chose a number of the Winkies who looked as if they
LINE 19: knew the most, and they all started away. They traveled that day and
LINE 20: part of the next until they came to the rocky plain where the Tin
LINE 21: Woodman lay, all battered and bent. His axe was near him, but the blade
LINE 22: was rusted and the handle broken off short.
LINE 23: The Winkies lifted him tenderly in their arms, and carried him back to
LINE 24: the Yellow Castle again, Dorothy shedding a few tears by the way at the
LINE 25: sad plight of her old friend, and the Lion looking sober and sorry.
LINE 26: When they reached the castle Dorothy said to the Winkies:
LINE 27: "Are any of your people tinsmiths?"
LINE 28: "Oh, yes. Some of us are very good tinsmiths," they told her.
LINE 29: "Then bring them to me," she said. And when the tinsmiths came,
LINE 30: bringing with them all their tools in baskets, she inquired, "Can you
LINE 31: straighten out those dents in the Tin Woodman, and bend him back into
LINE 32: shape again, and solder him together where he is broken?"
LINE 33: The tinsmiths looked the Woodman over carefully and then answered that
LINE 34: they thought they could mend him so he would be as good as ever. So
LINE 35: they set to work in one of the big yellow rooms of the castle and
LINE 36: worked for three days and four nights, hammering and twisting and
LINE 37: bending and soldering and polishing and pounding at the legs and body
LINE 38: and head of the Tin Woodman, until at last he was straightened out into
LINE 39: his old form, and his joints worked as well as ever. To be sure, there
LINE 40: were several patches on him, but the tinsmiths did a good job, and as
LINE 41: the Woodman was not a vain man he did not mind the patches at all.
LINE 42: When, at last, he walked into Dorothy's room and thanked her for
LINE 43: rescuing him, he was so pleased that he wept tears of joy, and Dorothy
LINE 44: had to wipe every tear carefully from his face with her apron, so his
LINE 45: joints would not be rusted. At the same time her own tears fell thick
LINE 46: and fast at the joy of meeting her old friend again, and these tears
LINE 47: did not need to be wiped away. As for the Lion, he wiped his eyes so
LINE 48: often with the tip of his tail that it became quite wet, and he was
LINE 49: obliged to go out into the courtyard and hold it in the sun till it
LINE 50: dried.
LINE 51: "If we only had the Scarecrow with us again," said the Tin Woodman,
LINE 52: when Dorothy had finished telling him everything that had happened, "I
LINE 53: should be quite happy."
LINE 54: "We must try to find him," said the girl.
LINE 55: So she called the Winkies to help her, and they walked all that day and
LINE 56: part of the next until they came to the tall tree in the branches of
LINE 57: which the Winged Monkeys had tossed the Scarecrow's clothes.
LINE 58: It was a very tall tree, and the trunk was so smooth that no one could
LINE 59: climb it; but the Woodman said at once, "I'll chop it down, and then we
LINE 60: can get the Scarecrow's clothes."
LINE 61: Now while the tinsmiths had been at work mending the Woodman himself,
LINE 62: another of the Winkies, who was a goldsmith, had made an axe-handle of
LINE 63: solid gold and fitted it to the Woodman's axe, instead of the old
LINE 64: broken handle. Others polished the blade until all the rust was removed
LINE 65: and it glistened like burnished silver.
LINE 66: As soon as he had spoken, the Tin Woodman began to chop, and in a short
LINE 67: time the tree fell over with a crash, whereupon the Scarecrow's clothes
LINE 68: fell out of the branches and rolled off on the ground.
LINE 69: Dorothy picked them up and had the Winkies carry them back to the
LINE 70: castle, where they were stuffed with nice, clean straw; and behold!
LINE 71: here was the Scarecrow, as good as ever, thanking them over and over
LINE 72: again for saving him.
LINE 73: Now that they were reunited, Dorothy and her friends spent a few happy
LINE 74: days at the Yellow Castle, where they found everything they needed to
LINE 75: make them comfortable.
LINE 76: But one day the girl thought of Aunt Em, and said, "We must go back to
LINE 77: Oz, and claim his promise."
LINE 78: "Yes," said the Woodman, "at last I shall get my heart."
LINE 79: "And I shall get my brains," added the Scarecrow joyfully.
LINE 80: "And I shall get my courage," said the Lion thoughtfully.
LINE 81: "And I shall get back to Kansas," cried Dorothy, clapping her hands.
LINE 82: "Oh, let us start for the Emerald City tomorrow!"
LINE 83: This they decided to do. The next day they called the Winkies together
LINE 84: and bade them good-bye. The Winkies were sorry to have them go, and
LINE 85: they had grown so fond of the Tin Woodman that they begged him to stay
LINE 86: and rule over them and the Yellow Land of the West. Finding they were
LINE 87: determined to go, the Winkies gave Toto and the Lion each a golden
LINE 88: collar; and to Dorothy they presented a beautiful bracelet studded with
LINE 89: diamonds; and to the Scarecrow they gave a gold-headed walking stick,
LINE 90: to keep him from stumbling; and to the Tin Woodman they offered a
LINE 91: silver oil-can, inlaid with gold and set with precious jewels.
LINE 92: Every one of the travelers made the Winkies a pretty speech in return,
LINE 93: and all shook hands with them until their arms ached.
LINE 94: Dorothy went to the Witch's cupboard to fill her basket with food for
LINE 95: the journey, and there she saw the Golden Cap. She tried it on her own
LINE 96: head and found that it fitted her exactly. She did not know anything
LINE 97: about the charm of the Golden Cap, but she saw that it was pretty, so
LINE 98: she made up her mind to wear it and carry her sunbonnet in the basket.
LINE 99: Then, being prepared for the journey, they all started for the Emerald
LINE 100: City; and the Winkies gave them three cheers and many good wishes to
LINE 101: carry with them.