LINE 1: Dorothy lived in the midst of the great Kansas prairies, with Uncle
LINE 2: Henry, who was a farmer, and Aunt Em, who was the farmer's wife. Their
LINE 3: house was small, for the lumber to build it had to be carried by wagon
LINE 4: many miles. There were four walls, a floor and a roof, which made one
LINE 5: room; and this room contained a rusty looking cookstove, a cupboard for
LINE 6: the dishes, a table, three or four chairs, and the beds. Uncle Henry
LINE 7: and Aunt Em had a big bed in one corner, and Dorothy a little bed in
LINE 8: another corner. There was no garret at all, and no cellar—except a
LINE 9: small hole dug in the ground, called a cyclone cellar, where the family
LINE 10: could go in case one of those great whirlwinds arose, mighty enough to
LINE 11: crush any building in its path. It was reached by a trap door in the
LINE 12: middle of the floor, from which a ladder led down into the small, dark
LINE 13: hole.
LINE 14: When Dorothy stood in the doorway and looked around, she could see
LINE 15: nothing but the great gray prairie on every side. Not a tree nor a
LINE 16: house broke the broad sweep of flat country that reached to the edge of
LINE 17: the sky in all directions. The sun had baked the plowed land into a
LINE 18: gray mass, with little cracks running through it. Even the grass was
LINE 19: not green, for the sun had burned the tops of the long blades until
LINE 20: they were the same gray color to be seen everywhere. Once the house had
LINE 21: been painted, but the sun blistered the paint and the rains washed it
LINE 22: away, and now the house was as dull and gray as everything else.
LINE 23: When Aunt Em came there to live she was a young, pretty wife. The sun
LINE 24: and wind had changed her, too. They had taken the sparkle from her eyes
LINE 25: and left them a sober gray; they had taken the red from her cheeks and
LINE 26: lips, and they were gray also. She was thin and gaunt, and never smiled
LINE 27: now. When Dorothy, who was an orphan, first came to her, Aunt Em had
LINE 28: been so startled by the child's laughter that she would scream and
LINE 29: press her hand upon her heart whenever Dorothy's merry voice reached
LINE 30: her ears; and she still looked at the little girl with wonder that she
LINE 31: could find anything to laugh at.
LINE 32: Uncle Henry never laughed. He worked hard from morning till night and
LINE 33: did not know what joy was. He was gray also, from his long beard to his
LINE 34: rough boots, and he looked stern and solemn, and rarely spoke.
LINE 35: It was Toto that made Dorothy laugh, and saved her from growing as gray
LINE 36: as her other surroundings. Toto was not gray; he was a little black
LINE 37: dog, with long silky hair and small black eyes that twinkled merrily on
LINE 38: either side of his funny, wee nose. Toto played all day long, and
LINE 39: Dorothy played with him, and loved him dearly.
LINE 40: Today, however, they were not playing. Uncle Henry sat upon the
LINE 41: doorstep and looked anxiously at the sky, which was even grayer than
LINE 42: usual. Dorothy stood in the door with Toto in her arms, and looked at
LINE 43: the sky too. Aunt Em was washing the dishes.
LINE 44: From the far north they heard a low wail of the wind, and Uncle Henry
LINE 45: and Dorothy could see where the long grass bowed in waves before the
LINE 46: coming storm. There now came a sharp whistling in the air from the
LINE 47: south, and as they turned their eyes that way they saw ripples in the
LINE 48: grass coming from that direction also.
LINE 49: Suddenly Uncle Henry stood up.
LINE 50: "There's a cyclone coming, Em," he called to his wife. "I'll go look
LINE 51: after the stock." Then he ran toward the sheds where the cows and
LINE 52: horses were kept.
LINE 53: Aunt Em dropped her work and came to the door. One glance told her of
LINE 54: the danger close at hand.
LINE 55: "Quick, Dorothy!" she screamed. "Run for the cellar!"
LINE 56: Toto jumped out of Dorothy's arms and hid under the bed, and the girl
LINE 57: started to get him. Aunt Em, badly frightened, threw open the trap door
LINE 58: in the floor and climbed down the ladder into the small, dark hole.
LINE 59: Dorothy caught Toto at last and started to follow her aunt. When she
LINE 60: was halfway across the room there came a great shriek from the wind,
LINE 61: and the house shook so hard that she lost her footing and sat down
LINE 62: suddenly upon the floor.
LINE 63: Then a strange thing happened.
LINE 64: The house whirled around two or three times and rose slowly through the
LINE 65: air. Dorothy felt as if she were going up in a balloon.
LINE 66: The north and south winds met where the house stood, and made it the
LINE 67: exact center of the cyclone. In the middle of a cyclone the air is
LINE 68: generally still, but the great pressure of the wind on every side of
LINE 69: the house raised it up higher and higher, until it was at the very top
LINE 70: of the cyclone; and there it remained and was carried miles and miles
LINE 71: away as easily as you could carry a feather.
LINE 72: It was very dark, and the wind howled horribly around her, but Dorothy
LINE 73: found she was riding quite easily. After the first few whirls around,
LINE 74: and one other time when the house tipped badly, she felt as if she were
LINE 75: being rocked gently, like a baby in a cradle.
LINE 76: Toto did not like it. He ran about the room, now here, now there,
LINE 77: barking loudly; but Dorothy sat quite still on the floor and waited to
LINE 78: see what would happen.
LINE 79: Once Toto got too near the open trap door, and fell in; and at first
LINE 80: the little girl thought she had lost him. But soon she saw one of his
LINE 81: ears sticking up through the hole, for the strong pressure of the air
LINE 82: was keeping him up so that he could not fall. She crept to the hole,
LINE 83: caught Toto by the ear, and dragged him into the room again, afterward
LINE 84: closing the trap door so that no more accidents could happen.
LINE 85: Hour after hour passed away, and slowly Dorothy got over her fright;
LINE 86: but she felt quite lonely, and the wind shrieked so loudly all about
LINE 87: her that she nearly became deaf. At first she had wondered if she would
LINE 88: be dashed to pieces when the house fell again; but as the hours passed
LINE 89: and nothing terrible happened, she stopped worrying and resolved to
LINE 90: wait calmly and see what the future would bring. At last she crawled
LINE 91: over the swaying floor to her bed, and lay down upon it; and Toto
LINE 92: followed and lay down beside her.
LINE 93: In spite of the swaying of the house and the wailing of the wind,
LINE 94: Dorothy soon closed her eyes and fell fast asleep.