LINE 1: For three days Dorothy heard nothing from Oz. These were sad days for
LINE 2: the little girl, although her friends were all quite happy and
LINE 3: contented. The Scarecrow told them there were wonderful thoughts in his
LINE 4: head; but he would not say what they were because he knew no one could
LINE 5: understand them but himself. When the Tin Woodman walked about he felt
LINE 6: his heart rattling around in his breast; and he told Dorothy he had
LINE 7: discovered it to be a kinder and more tender heart than the one he had
LINE 8: owned when he was made of flesh. The Lion declared he was afraid of
LINE 9: nothing on earth, and would gladly face an army or a dozen of the
LINE 10: fierce Kalidahs.
LINE 11: Thus each of the little party was satisfied except Dorothy, who longed
LINE 12: more than ever to get back to Kansas.
LINE 13: On the fourth day, to her great joy, Oz sent for her, and when she
LINE 14: entered the Throne Room he greeted her pleasantly:
LINE 15: "Sit down, my dear; I think I have found the way to get you out of this
LINE 16: country."
LINE 17: "And back to Kansas?" she asked eagerly.
LINE 18: "Well, I'm not sure about Kansas," said Oz, "for I haven't the faintest
LINE 19: notion which way it lies. But the first thing to do is to cross the
LINE 20: desert, and then it should be easy to find your way home."
LINE 21: "How can I cross the desert?" she inquired.
LINE 22: "Well, I'll tell you what I think," said the little man. "You see, when
LINE 23: I came to this country it was in a balloon. You also came through the
LINE 24: air, being carried by a cyclone. So I believe the best way to get
LINE 25: across the desert will be through the air. Now, it is quite beyond my
LINE 26: powers to make a cyclone; but I've been thinking the matter over, and I
LINE 27: believe I can make a balloon."
LINE 28: "How?" asked Dorothy.
LINE 29: "A balloon," said Oz, "is made of silk, which is coated with glue to
LINE 30: keep the gas in it. I have plenty of silk in the Palace, so it will be
LINE 31: no trouble to make the balloon. But in all this country there is no gas
LINE 32: to fill the balloon with, to make it float."
LINE 33: "If it won't float," remarked Dorothy, "it will be of no use to us."
LINE 34: "True," answered Oz. "But there is another way to make it float, which
LINE 35: is to fill it with hot air. Hot air isn't as good as gas, for if the
LINE 36: air should get cold the balloon would come down in the desert, and we
LINE 37: should be lost."
LINE 38: "We!" exclaimed the girl. "Are you going with me?"
LINE 39: "Yes, of course," replied Oz. "I am tired of being such a humbug. If I
LINE 40: should go out of this Palace my people would soon discover I am not a
LINE 41: Wizard, and then they would be vexed with me for having deceived them.
LINE 42: So I have to stay shut up in these rooms all day, and it gets tiresome.
LINE 43: I'd much rather go back to Kansas with you and be in a circus again."
LINE 44: "I shall be glad to have your company," said Dorothy.
LINE 45: "Thank you," he answered. "Now, if you will help me sew the silk
LINE 46: together, we will begin to work on our balloon."
LINE 47: So Dorothy took a needle and thread, and as fast as Oz cut the strips
LINE 48: of silk into proper shape the girl sewed them neatly together. First
LINE 49: there was a strip of light green silk, then a strip of dark green and
LINE 50: then a strip of emerald green; for Oz had a fancy to make the balloon
LINE 51: in different shades of the color about them. It took three days to sew
LINE 52: all the strips together, but when it was finished they had a big bag of
LINE 53: green silk more than twenty feet long.
LINE 54: Then Oz painted it on the inside with a coat of thin glue, to make it
LINE 55: airtight, after which he announced that the balloon was ready.
LINE 56: "But we must have a basket to ride in," he said. So he sent the soldier
LINE 57: with the green whiskers for a big clothes basket, which he fastened
LINE 58: with many ropes to the bottom of the balloon.
LINE 59: When it was all ready, Oz sent word to his people that he was going to
LINE 60: make a visit to a great brother Wizard who lived in the clouds. The
LINE 61: news spread rapidly throughout the city and everyone came to see the
LINE 62: wonderful sight.
LINE 63: Oz ordered the balloon carried out in front of the Palace, and the
LINE 64: people gazed upon it with much curiosity. The Tin Woodman had chopped a
LINE 65: big pile of wood, and now he made a fire of it, and Oz held the bottom
LINE 66: of the balloon over the fire so that the hot air that arose from it
LINE 67: would be caught in the silken bag. Gradually the balloon swelled out
LINE 68: and rose into the air, until finally the basket just touched the
LINE 69: ground.
LINE 70: Then Oz got into the basket and said to all the people in a loud voice:
LINE 71: "I am now going away to make a visit. While I am gone the Scarecrow
LINE 72: will rule over you. I command you to obey him as you would me."
LINE 73: The balloon was by this time tugging hard at the rope that held it to
LINE 74: the ground, for the air within it was hot, and this made it so much
LINE 75: lighter in weight than the air without that it pulled hard to rise into
LINE 76: the sky.
LINE 77: "Come, Dorothy!" cried the Wizard. "Hurry up, or the balloon will fly
LINE 78: away."
LINE 79: "I can't find Toto anywhere," replied Dorothy, who did not wish to
LINE 80: leave her little dog behind. Toto had run into the crowd to bark at a
LINE 81: kitten, and Dorothy at last found him. She picked him up and ran
LINE 82: towards the balloon.
LINE 83: She was within a few steps of it, and Oz was holding out his hands to
LINE 84: help her into the basket, when, crack! went the ropes, and the balloon
LINE 85: rose into the air without her.
LINE 86: "Come back!" she screamed. "I want to go, too!"
LINE 87: "I can't come back, my dear," called Oz from the basket. "Good-bye!"
LINE 88: "Good-bye!" shouted everyone, and all eyes were turned upward to where
LINE 89: the Wizard was riding in the basket, rising every moment farther and
LINE 90: farther into the sky.
LINE 91: And that was the last any of them ever saw of Oz, the Wonderful Wizard,
LINE 92: though he may have reached Omaha safely, and be there now, for all we
LINE 93: know. But the people remembered him lovingly, and said to one another:
LINE 94: "Oz was always our friend. When he was here he built for us this
LINE 95: beautiful Emerald City, and now he is gone he has left the Wise
LINE 96: Scarecrow to rule over us."
LINE 97: Still, for many days they grieved over the loss of the Wonderful
LINE 98: Wizard, and would not be comforted.