LINE 1: With my head full of George Barnwell, I was at first disposed to
LINE 2: believe that _I_ must have had some hand in the attack upon my sister,
LINE 3: or at all events that as her near relation, popularly known to be under
LINE 4: obligations to her, I was a more legitimate object of suspicion than
LINE 5: any one else. But when, in the clearer light of next morning, I began
LINE 6: to reconsider the matter and to hear it discussed around me on all
LINE 7: sides, I took another view of the case, which was more reasonable.
LINE 8: Joe had been at the Three Jolly Bargemen, smoking his pipe, from a
LINE 9: quarter after eight o'clock to a quarter before ten. While he was
LINE 10: there, my sister had been seen standing at the kitchen door, and had
LINE 11: exchanged Good Night with a farm-labourer going home. The man could not
LINE 12: be more particular as to the time at which he saw her (he got into
LINE 13: dense confusion when he tried to be), than that it must have been
LINE 14: before nine. When Joe went home at five minutes before ten, he found
LINE 15: her struck down on the floor, and promptly called in assistance. The
LINE 16: fire had not then burnt unusually low, nor was the snuff of the candle
LINE 17: very long; the candle, however, had been blown out.
LINE 18: Nothing had been taken away from any part of the house. Neither, beyond
LINE 19: the blowing out of the candle,—which stood on a table between the door
LINE 20: and my sister, and was behind her when she stood facing the fire and
LINE 21: was struck,—was there any disarrangement of the kitchen, excepting such
LINE 22: as she herself had made, in falling and bleeding. But, there was one
LINE 23: remarkable piece of evidence on the spot. She had been struck with
LINE 24: something blunt and heavy, on the head and spine; after the blows were
LINE 25: dealt, something heavy had been thrown down at her with considerable
LINE 26: violence, as she lay on her face. And on the ground beside her, when
LINE 27: Joe picked her up, was a convict's leg-iron which had been filed
LINE 28: asunder.
LINE 29: Now, Joe, examining this iron with a smith's eye, declared it to have
LINE 30: been filed asunder some time ago. The hue and cry going off to the
LINE 31: Hulks, and people coming thence to examine the iron, Joe's opinion was
LINE 32: corroborated. They did not undertake to say when it had left the
LINE 33: prison-ships to which it undoubtedly had once belonged; but they
LINE 34: claimed to know for certain that that particular manacle had not been
LINE 35: worn by either of the two convicts who had escaped last night. Further,
LINE 36: one of those two was already retaken, and had not freed himself of his
LINE 37: iron.
LINE 38: Knowing what I knew, I set up an inference of my own here. I believed
LINE 39: the iron to be my convict's iron,—the iron I had seen and heard him
LINE 40: filing at, on the marshes,—but my mind did not accuse him of having put
LINE 41: it to its latest use. For I believed one of two other persons to have
LINE 42: become possessed of it, and to have turned it to this cruel account.
LINE 43: Either Orlick, or the strange man who had shown me the file.
LINE 44: Now, as to Orlick; he had gone to town exactly as he told us when we
LINE 45: picked him up at the turnpike, he had been seen about town all the
LINE 46: evening, he had been in divers companies in several public-houses, and
LINE 47: he had come back with myself and Mr. Wopsle. There was nothing against
LINE 48: him, save the quarrel; and my sister had quarrelled with him, and with
LINE 49: everybody else about her, ten thousand times. As to the strange man; if
LINE 50: he had come back for his two bank-notes there could have been no
LINE 51: dispute about them, because my sister was fully prepared to restore
LINE 52: them. Besides, there had been no altercation; the assailant had come in
LINE 53: so silently and suddenly, that she had been felled before she could
LINE 54: look round.
LINE 55: It was horrible to think that I had provided the weapon, however
LINE 56: undesignedly, but I could hardly think otherwise. I suffered
LINE 57: unspeakable trouble while I considered and reconsidered whether I
LINE 58: should at last dissolve that spell of my childhood and tell Joe all the
LINE 59: story. For months afterwards, I every day settled the question finally
LINE 60: in the negative, and reopened and reargued it next morning. The
LINE 61: contention came, after all, to this;—the secret was such an old one
LINE 62: now, had so grown into me and become a part of myself, that I could not
LINE 63: tear it away. In addition to the dread that, having led up to so much
LINE 64: mischief, it would be now more likely than ever to alienate Joe from me
LINE 65: if he believed it, I had a further restraining dread that he would not
LINE 66: believe it, but would assort it with the fabulous dogs and veal-cutlets
LINE 67: as a monstrous invention. However, I temporized with myself, of
LINE 68: course—for, was I not wavering between right and wrong, when the thing
LINE 69: is always done?—and resolved to make a full disclosure if I should see
LINE 70: any such new occasion as a new chance of helping in the discovery of
LINE 71: the assailant.
LINE 72: The Constables and the Bow Street men from London—for, this happened in
LINE 73: the days of the extinct red-waistcoated police—were about the house for
LINE 74: a week or two, and did pretty much what I have heard and read of like
LINE 75: authorities doing in other such cases. They took up several obviously
LINE 76: wrong people, and they ran their heads very hard against wrong ideas,
LINE 77: and persisted in trying to fit the circumstances to the ideas, instead
LINE 78: of trying to extract ideas from the circumstances. Also, they stood
LINE 79: about the door of the Jolly Bargemen, with knowing and reserved looks
LINE 80: that filled the whole neighbourhood with admiration; and they had a
LINE 81: mysterious manner of taking their drink, that was almost as good as
LINE 82: taking the culprit. But not quite, for they never did it.
LINE 83: Long after these constitutional powers had dispersed, my sister lay
LINE 84: very ill in bed. Her sight was disturbed, so that she saw objects
LINE 85: multiplied, and grasped at visionary teacups and wineglasses instead of
LINE 86: the realities; her hearing was greatly impaired; her memory also; and
LINE 87: her speech was unintelligible. When, at last, she came round so far as
LINE 88: to be helped downstairs, it was still necessary to keep my slate always
LINE 89: by her, that she might indicate in writing what she could not indicate
LINE 90: in speech. As she was (very bad handwriting apart) a more than
LINE 91: indifferent speller, and as Joe was a more than indifferent reader,
LINE 92: extraordinary complications arose between them which I was always
LINE 93: called in to solve. The administration of mutton instead of medicine,
LINE 94: the substitution of Tea for Joe, and the baker for bacon, were among
LINE 95: the mildest of my own mistakes.
LINE 96: However, her temper was greatly improved, and she was patient. A
LINE 97: tremulous uncertainty of the action of all her limbs soon became a part
LINE 98: of her regular state, and afterwards, at intervals of two or three
LINE 99: months, she would often put her hands to her head, and would then
LINE 100: remain for about a week at a time in some gloomy aberration of mind. We
LINE 101: were at a loss to find a suitable attendant for her, until a
LINE 102: circumstance happened conveniently to relieve us. Mr. Wopsle's
LINE 103: great-aunt conquered a confirmed habit of living into which she had
LINE 104: fallen, and Biddy became a part of our establishment.
LINE 105: It may have been about a month after my sister's reappearance in the
LINE 106: kitchen, when Biddy came to us with a small speckled box containing the
LINE 107: whole of her worldly effects, and became a blessing to the household.
LINE 108: Above all, she was a blessing to Joe, for the dear old fellow was sadly
LINE 109: cut up by the constant contemplation of the wreck of his wife, and had
LINE 110: been accustomed, while attending on her of an evening, to turn to me
LINE 111: every now and then and say, with his blue eyes moistened, "Such a fine
LINE 112: figure of a woman as she once were, Pip!" Biddy instantly taking the
LINE 113: cleverest charge of her as though she had studied her from infancy; Joe
LINE 114: became able in some sort to appreciate the greater quiet of his life,
LINE 115: and to get down to the Jolly Bargemen now and then for a change that
LINE 116: did him good. It was characteristic of the police people that they had
LINE 117: all more or less suspected poor Joe (though he never knew it), and that
LINE 118: they had to a man concurred in regarding him as one of the deepest
LINE 119: spirits they had ever encountered.
LINE 120: Biddy's first triumph in her new office, was to solve a difficulty that
LINE 121: had completely vanquished me. I had tried hard at it, but had made
LINE 122: nothing of it. Thus it was:—
LINE 123: Again and again and again, my sister had traced upon the slate, a
LINE 124: character that looked like a curious T, and then with the utmost
LINE 125: eagerness had called our attention to it as something she particularly
LINE 126: wanted. I had in vain tried everything producible that began with a T,
LINE 127: from tar to toast and tub. At length it had come into my head that the
LINE 128: sign looked like a hammer, and on my lustily calling that word in my
LINE 129: sister's ear, she had begun to hammer on the table and had expressed a
LINE 130: qualified assent. Thereupon, I had brought in all our hammers, one
LINE 131: after another, but without avail. Then I bethought me of a crutch, the
LINE 132: shape being much the same, and I borrowed one in the village, and
LINE 133: displayed it to my sister with considerable confidence. But she shook
LINE 134: her head to that extent when she was shown it, that we were terrified
LINE 135: lest in her weak and shattered state she should dislocate her neck.
LINE 136: When my sister found that Biddy was very quick to understand her, this
LINE 137: mysterious sign reappeared on the slate. Biddy looked thoughtfully at
LINE 138: it, heard my explanation, looked thoughtfully at my sister, looked
LINE 139: thoughtfully at Joe (who was always represented on the slate by his
LINE 140: initial letter), and ran into the forge, followed by Joe and me.
LINE 141: "Why, of course!" cried Biddy, with an exultant face. "Don't you see?
LINE 142: It's _him_!"
LINE 143: Orlick, without a doubt! She had lost his name, and could only signify
LINE 144: him by his hammer. We told him why we wanted him to come into the
LINE 145: kitchen, and he slowly laid down his hammer, wiped his brow with his
LINE 146: arm, took another wipe at it with his apron, and came slouching out,
LINE 147: with a curious loose vagabond bend in the knees that strongly
LINE 148: distinguished him.
LINE 149: I confess that I expected to see my sister denounce him, and that I was
LINE 150: disappointed by the different result. She manifested the greatest
LINE 151: anxiety to be on good terms with him, was evidently much pleased by his
LINE 152: being at length produced, and motioned that she would have him given
LINE 153: something to drink. She watched his countenance as if she were
LINE 154: particularly wishful to be assured that he took kindly to his
LINE 155: reception, she showed every possible desire to conciliate him, and
LINE 156: there was an air of humble propitiation in all she did, such as I have
LINE 157: seen pervade the bearing of a child towards a hard master. After that
LINE 158: day, a day rarely passed without her drawing the hammer on her slate,
LINE 159: and without Orlick's slouching in and standing doggedly before her, as
LINE 160: if he knew no more than I did what to make of it.