LINE 1: It is a most miserable thing to feel ashamed of home. There may be
LINE 2: black ingratitude in the thing, and the punishment may be retributive
LINE 3: and well deserved; but that it is a miserable thing, I can testify.
LINE 4: Home had never been a very pleasant place to me, because of my sister's
LINE 5: temper. But, Joe had sanctified it, and I had believed in it. I had
LINE 6: believed in the best parlour as a most elegant saloon; I had believed
LINE 7: in the front door, as a mysterious portal of the Temple of State whose
LINE 8: solemn opening was attended with a sacrifice of roast fowls; I had
LINE 9: believed in the kitchen as a chaste though not magnificent apartment; I
LINE 10: had believed in the forge as the glowing road to manhood and
LINE 11: independence. Within a single year all this was changed. Now it was all
LINE 12: coarse and common, and I would not have had Miss Havisham and Estella
LINE 13: see it on any account.
LINE 14: How much of my ungracious condition of mind may have been my own fault,
LINE 15: how much Miss Havisham's, how much my sister's, is now of no moment to
LINE 16: me or to any one. The change was made in me; the thing was done. Well
LINE 17: or ill done, excusably or inexcusably, it was done.
LINE 18: Once, it had seemed to me that when I should at last roll up my
LINE 19: shirt-sleeves and go into the forge, Joe's 'prentice, I should be
LINE 20: distinguished and happy. Now the reality was in my hold, I only felt
LINE 21: that I was dusty with the dust of small-coal, and that I had a weight
LINE 22: upon my daily remembrance to which the anvil was a feather. There have
LINE 23: been occasions in my later life (I suppose as in most lives) when I
LINE 24: have felt for a time as if a thick curtain had fallen on all its
LINE 25: interest and romance, to shut me out from anything save dull endurance
LINE 26: any more. Never has that curtain dropped so heavy and blank, as when my
LINE 27: way in life lay stretched out straight before me through the newly
LINE 28: entered road of apprenticeship to Joe.
LINE 29: I remember that at a later period of my "time," I used to stand about
LINE 30: the churchyard on Sunday evenings when night was falling, comparing my
LINE 31: own perspective with the windy marsh view, and making out some likeness
LINE 32: between them by thinking how flat and low both were, and how on both
LINE 33: there came an unknown way and a dark mist and then the sea. I was quite
LINE 34: as dejected on the first working-day of my apprenticeship as in that
LINE 35: after-time; but I am glad to know that I never breathed a murmur to Joe
LINE 36: while my indentures lasted. It is about the only thing I _am_ glad to
LINE 37: know of myself in that connection.
LINE 38: For, though it includes what I proceed to add, all the merit of what I
LINE 39: proceed to add was Joe's. It was not because I was faithful, but
LINE 40: because Joe was faithful, that I never ran away and went for a soldier
LINE 41: or a sailor. It was not because I had a strong sense of the virtue of
LINE 42: industry, but because Joe had a strong sense of the virtue of industry,
LINE 43: that I worked with tolerable zeal against the grain. It is not possible
LINE 44: to know how far the influence of any amiable honest-hearted duty-doing
LINE 45: man flies out into the world; but it is very possible to know how it
LINE 46: has touched one's self in going by, and I know right well that any good
LINE 47: that intermixed itself with my apprenticeship came of plain contented
LINE 48: Joe, and not of restlessly aspiring discontented me.
LINE 49: What I wanted, who can say? How can _I_ say, when I never knew? What I
LINE 50: dreaded was, that in some unlucky hour I, being at my grimiest and
LINE 51: commonest, should lift up my eyes and see Estella looking in at one of
LINE 52: the wooden windows of the forge. I was haunted by the fear that she
LINE 53: would, sooner or later, find me out, with a black face and hands, doing
LINE 54: the coarsest part of my work, and would exult over me and despise me.
LINE 55: Often after dark, when I was pulling the bellows for Joe, and we were
LINE 56: singing Old Clem, and when the thought how we used to sing it at Miss
LINE 57: Havisham's would seem to show me Estella's face in the fire, with her
LINE 58: pretty hair fluttering in the wind and her eyes scorning me,—often at
LINE 59: such a time I would look towards those panels of black night in the
LINE 60: wall which the wooden windows then were, and would fancy that I saw her
LINE 61: just drawing her face away, and would believe that she had come at
LINE 62: last.
LINE 63: After that, when we went in to supper, the place and the meal would
LINE 64: have a more homely look than ever, and I would feel more ashamed of
LINE 65: home than ever, in my own ungracious breast.