LINE 1: My state of mind regarding the pilfering from which I had been so
LINE 2: unexpectedly exonerated did not impel me to frank disclosure; but I
LINE 3: hope it had some dregs of good at the bottom of it.
LINE 4: I do not recall that I felt any tenderness of conscience in reference
LINE 5: to Mrs. Joe, when the fear of being found out was lifted off me. But I
LINE 6: loved Joe,—perhaps for no better reason in those early days than
LINE 7: because the dear fellow let me love him,—and, as to him, my inner self
LINE 8: was not so easily composed. It was much upon my mind (particularly when
LINE 9: I first saw him looking about for his file) that I ought to tell Joe
LINE 10: the whole truth. Yet I did not, and for the reason that I mistrusted
LINE 11: that if I did, he would think me worse than I was. The fear of losing
LINE 12: Joe's confidence, and of thenceforth sitting in the chimney corner at
LINE 13: night staring drearily at my forever lost companion and friend, tied up
LINE 14: my tongue. I morbidly represented to myself that if Joe knew it, I
LINE 15: never afterwards could see him at the fireside feeling his fair
LINE 16: whisker, without thinking that he was meditating on it. That, if Joe
LINE 17: knew it, I never afterwards could see him glance, however casually, at
LINE 18: yesterday's meat or pudding when it came on to-day's table, without
LINE 19: thinking that he was debating whether I had been in the pantry. That,
LINE 20: if Joe knew it, and at any subsequent period of our joint domestic life
LINE 21: remarked that his beer was flat or thick, the conviction that he
LINE 22: suspected tar in it, would bring a rush of blood to my face. In a word,
LINE 23: I was too cowardly to do what I knew to be right, as I had been too
LINE 24: cowardly to avoid doing what I knew to be wrong. I had had no
LINE 25: intercourse with the world at that time, and I imitated none of its
LINE 26: many inhabitants who act in this manner. Quite an untaught genius, I
LINE 27: made the discovery of the line of action for myself.
LINE 28: As I was sleepy before we were far away from the prison-ship, Joe took
LINE 29: me on his back again and carried me home. He must have had a tiresome
LINE 30: journey of it, for Mr. Wopsle, being knocked up, was in such a very bad
LINE 31: temper that if the Church had been thrown open, he would probably have
LINE 32: excommunicated the whole expedition, beginning with Joe and myself. In
LINE 33: his lay capacity, he persisted in sitting down in the damp to such an
LINE 34: insane extent, that when his coat was taken off to be dried at the
LINE 35: kitchen fire, the circumstantial evidence on his trousers would have
LINE 36: hanged him, if it had been a capital offence.
LINE 37: By that time, I was staggering on the kitchen floor like a little
LINE 38: drunkard, through having been newly set upon my feet, and through
LINE 39: having been fast asleep, and through waking in the heat and lights and
LINE 40: noise of tongues. As I came to myself (with the aid of a heavy thump
LINE 41: between the shoulders, and the restorative exclamation "Yah! Was there
LINE 42: ever such a boy as this!" from my sister,) I found Joe telling them
LINE 43: about the convict's confession, and all the visitors suggesting
LINE 44: different ways by which he had got into the pantry. Mr. Pumblechook
LINE 45: made out, after carefully surveying the premises, that he had first got
LINE 46: upon the roof of the forge, and had then got upon the roof of the
LINE 47: house, and had then let himself down the kitchen chimney by a rope made
LINE 48: of his bedding cut into strips; and as Mr. Pumblechook was very
LINE 49: positive and drove his own chaise-cart—over everybody—it was agreed
LINE 50: that it must be so. Mr. Wopsle, indeed, wildly cried out, "No!" with
LINE 51: the feeble malice of a tired man; but, as he had no theory, and no coat
LINE 52: on, he was unanimously set at naught,—not to mention his smoking hard
LINE 53: behind, as he stood with his back to the kitchen fire to draw the damp
LINE 54: out: which was not calculated to inspire confidence.
LINE 55: This was all I heard that night before my sister clutched me, as a
LINE 56: slumberous offence to the company's eyesight, and assisted me up to bed
LINE 57: with such a strong hand that I seemed to have fifty boots on, and to be
LINE 58: dangling them all against the edges of the stairs. My state of mind, as
LINE 59: I have described it, began before I was up in the morning, and lasted
LINE 60: long after the subject had died out, and had ceased to be mentioned
LINE 61: saving on exceptional occasions.