LINE 1: Nothing is more painful to the human mind than, after the feelings have
LINE 2: been worked up by a quick succession of events, the dead calmness of
LINE 3: inaction and certainty which follows and deprives the soul both of hope
LINE 4: and fear. Justine died, she rested, and I was alive. The blood flowed
LINE 5: freely in my veins, but a weight of despair and remorse pressed on my
LINE 6: heart which nothing could remove. Sleep fled from my eyes; I wandered
LINE 7: like an evil spirit, for I had committed deeds of mischief beyond
LINE 8: description horrible, and more, much more (I persuaded myself) was yet
LINE 9: behind. Yet my heart overflowed with kindness and the love of virtue.
LINE 10: I had begun life with benevolent intentions and thirsted for the moment
LINE 11: when I should put them in practice and make myself useful to my fellow
LINE 12: beings. Now all was blasted; instead of that serenity of conscience
LINE 13: which allowed me to look back upon the past with self-satisfaction, and
LINE 14: from thence to gather promise of new hopes, I was seized by remorse and
LINE 15: the sense of guilt, which hurried me away to a hell of intense tortures
LINE 16: such as no language can describe.
LINE 17: This state of mind preyed upon my health, which had perhaps never
LINE 18: entirely recovered from the first shock it had sustained. I shunned
LINE 19: the face of man; all sound of joy or complacency was torture to me;
LINE 20: solitude was my only consolation—deep, dark, deathlike solitude.
LINE 21: My father observed with pain the alteration perceptible in my disposition
LINE 22: and habits and endeavoured by arguments deduced from the feelings of his
LINE 23: serene conscience and guiltless life to inspire me with fortitude and
LINE 24: awaken in me the courage to dispel the dark cloud which brooded over me.
LINE 25: "Do you think, Victor," said he, "that I do not suffer
LINE 26: also? No one could love a child more than I loved your
LINE 27: brother"—tears came into his eyes as he spoke—"but
LINE 28: is it not a duty to the survivors that we should refrain from augmenting
LINE 29: their unhappiness by an appearance of immoderate grief? It is also a duty
LINE 30: owed to yourself, for excessive sorrow prevents improvement or enjoyment,
LINE 31: or even the discharge of daily usefulness, without which no man is fit for
LINE 32: society."
LINE 33: This advice, although good, was totally inapplicable to my case; I
LINE 34: should have been the first to hide my grief and console my friends if
LINE 35: remorse had not mingled its bitterness, and terror its alarm, with my
LINE 36: other sensations. Now I could only answer my father with a look of
LINE 37: despair and endeavour to hide myself from his view.
LINE 38: About this time we retired to our house at Belrive. This change was
LINE 39: particularly agreeable to me. The shutting of the gates regularly at
LINE 40: ten o'clock and the impossibility of remaining on the lake after that
LINE 41: hour had rendered our residence within the walls of Geneva very irksome
LINE 42: to me. I was now free. Often, after the rest of the family had
LINE 43: retired for the night, I took the boat and passed many hours upon the
LINE 44: water. Sometimes, with my sails set, I was carried by the wind; and
LINE 45: sometimes, after rowing into the middle of the lake, I left the boat to
LINE 46: pursue its own course and gave way to my own miserable reflections. I
LINE 47: was often tempted, when all was at peace around me, and I the only
LINE 48: unquiet thing that wandered restless in a scene so beautiful and
LINE 49: heavenly—if I except some bat, or the frogs, whose harsh and
LINE 50: interrupted croaking was heard only when I approached the shore—often,
LINE 51: I say, I was tempted to plunge into the silent lake, that the waters
LINE 52: might close over me and my calamities for ever. But I was restrained,
LINE 53: when I thought of the heroic and suffering Elizabeth, whom I tenderly
LINE 54: loved, and whose existence was bound up in mine. I thought also of my
LINE 55: father and surviving brother; should I by my base desertion leave them
LINE 56: exposed and unprotected to the malice of the fiend whom I had let loose
LINE 57: among them?
LINE 58: At these moments I wept bitterly and wished that peace would revisit my
LINE 59: mind only that I might afford them consolation and happiness. But that
LINE 60: could not be. Remorse extinguished every hope. I had been the author of
LINE 61: unalterable evils, and I lived in daily fear lest the monster whom I had
LINE 62: created should perpetrate some new wickedness. I had an obscure feeling
LINE 63: that all was not over and that he would still commit some signal crime,
LINE 64: which by its enormity should almost efface the recollection of the past.
LINE 65: There was always scope for fear so long as anything I loved remained
LINE 66: behind. My abhorrence of this fiend cannot be conceived. When I thought of
LINE 67: him I gnashed my teeth, my eyes became inflamed, and I ardently wished to
LINE 68: extinguish that life which I had so thoughtlessly bestowed. When I
LINE 69: reflected on his crimes and malice, my hatred and revenge burst all bounds
LINE 70: of moderation. I would have made a pilgrimage to the highest peak of the
LINE 71: Andes, could I, when there, have precipitated him to their base. I wished
LINE 72: to see him again, that I might wreak the utmost extent of abhorrence on his
LINE 73: head and avenge the deaths of William and Justine.
LINE 74: Our house was the house of mourning. My father's health was deeply
LINE 75: shaken by the horror of the recent events. Elizabeth was sad and
LINE 76: desponding; she no longer took delight in her ordinary occupations; all
LINE 77: pleasure seemed to her sacrilege toward the dead; eternal woe and tears she
LINE 78: then thought was the just tribute she should pay to innocence so blasted
LINE 79: and destroyed. She was no longer that happy creature who in earlier youth
LINE 80: wandered with me on the banks of the lake and talked with ecstasy of our
LINE 81: future prospects. The first of those sorrows which are sent to wean us from
LINE 82: the earth had visited her, and its dimming influence quenched her dearest
LINE 83: smiles.
LINE 84: "When I reflect, my dear cousin," said she, "on the miserable death of
LINE 85: Justine Moritz, I no longer see the world and its works as they before
LINE 86: appeared to me. Before, I looked upon the accounts of vice and
LINE 87: injustice that I read in books or heard from others as tales of ancient
LINE 88: days or imaginary evils; at least they were remote and more familiar to
LINE 89: reason than to the imagination; but now misery has come home, and men
LINE 90: appear to me as monsters thirsting for each other's blood. Yet I am
LINE 91: certainly unjust. Everybody believed that poor girl to be guilty; and
LINE 92: if she could have committed the crime for which she suffered, assuredly
LINE 93: she would have been the most depraved of human creatures. For the sake
LINE 94: of a few jewels, to have murdered the son of her benefactor and friend,
LINE 95: a child whom she had nursed from its birth, and appeared to love as if
LINE 96: it had been her own! I could not consent to the death of any human
LINE 97: being, but certainly I should have thought such a creature unfit to
LINE 98: remain in the society of men. But she was innocent. I know, I feel
LINE 99: she was innocent; you are of the same opinion, and that confirms me.
LINE 100: Alas! Victor, when falsehood can look so like the truth, who can
LINE 101: assure themselves of certain happiness? I feel as if I were walking on
LINE 102: the edge of a precipice, towards which thousands are crowding and
LINE 103: endeavouring to plunge me into the abyss. William and Justine were
LINE 104: assassinated, and the murderer escapes; he walks about the world free,
LINE 105: and perhaps respected. But even if I were condemned to suffer on the
LINE 106: scaffold for the same crimes, I would not change places with such a
LINE 107: wretch."
LINE 108: I listened to this discourse with the extremest agony. I, not in deed,
LINE 109: but in effect, was the true murderer. Elizabeth read my anguish in my
LINE 110: countenance, and kindly taking my hand, said, "My dearest friend, you
LINE 111: must calm yourself. These events have affected me, God knows how
LINE 112: deeply; but I am not so wretched as you are. There is an expression of
LINE 113: despair, and sometimes of revenge, in your countenance that makes me
LINE 114: tremble. Dear Victor, banish these dark passions. Remember the
LINE 115: friends around you, who centre all their hopes in you. Have we lost
LINE 116: the power of rendering you happy? Ah! While we love, while we are
LINE 117: true to each other, here in this land of peace and beauty, your native
LINE 118: country, we may reap every tranquil blessing—what can disturb our
LINE 119: peace?"
LINE 120: And could not such words from her whom I fondly prized before every
LINE 121: other gift of fortune suffice to chase away the fiend that lurked in my
LINE 122: heart? Even as she spoke I drew near to her, as if in terror, lest at
LINE 123: that very moment the destroyer had been near to rob me of her.
LINE 124: Thus not the tenderness of friendship, nor the beauty of earth, nor of
LINE 125: heaven, could redeem my soul from woe; the very accents of love were
LINE 126: ineffectual. I was encompassed by a cloud which no beneficial
LINE 127: influence could penetrate. The wounded deer dragging its fainting
LINE 128: limbs to some untrodden brake, there to gaze upon the arrow which had
LINE 129: pierced it, and to die, was but a type of me.
LINE 130: Sometimes I could cope with the sullen despair that overwhelmed me, but
LINE 131: sometimes the whirlwind passions of my soul drove me to seek, by bodily
LINE 132: exercise and by change of place, some relief from my intolerable
LINE 133: sensations. It was during an access of this kind that I suddenly left
LINE 134: my home, and bending my steps towards the near Alpine valleys, sought
LINE 135: in the magnificence, the eternity of such scenes, to forget myself and
LINE 136: my ephemeral, because human, sorrows. My wanderings were directed
LINE 137: towards the valley of Chamounix. I had visited it frequently during my
LINE 138: boyhood. Six years had passed since then: _I_ was a wreck, but nought
LINE 139: had changed in those savage and enduring scenes.
LINE 140: I performed the first part of my journey on horseback. I afterwards
LINE 141: hired a mule, as the more sure-footed and least liable to receive
LINE 142: injury on these rugged roads. The weather was fine; it was about the
LINE 143: middle of the month of August, nearly two months after the death of
LINE 144: Justine, that miserable epoch from which I dated all my woe. The
LINE 145: weight upon my spirit was sensibly lightened as I plunged yet deeper in
LINE 146: the ravine of Arve. The immense mountains and precipices that overhung
LINE 147: me on every side, the sound of the river raging among the rocks, and
LINE 148: the dashing of the waterfalls around spoke of a power mighty as
LINE 149: Omnipotence—and I ceased to fear or to bend before any being less
LINE 150: almighty than that which had created and ruled the elements, here
LINE 151: displayed in their most terrific guise. Still, as I ascended higher,
LINE 152: the valley assumed a more magnificent and astonishing character.
LINE 153: Ruined castles hanging on the precipices of piny mountains, the
LINE 154: impetuous Arve, and cottages every here and there peeping forth from
LINE 155: among the trees formed a scene of singular beauty. But it was
LINE 156: augmented and rendered sublime by the mighty Alps, whose white and
LINE 157: shining pyramids and domes towered above all, as belonging to another
LINE 158: earth, the habitations of another race of beings.
LINE 159: I passed the bridge of Pélissier, where the ravine, which the river
LINE 160: forms, opened before me, and I began to ascend the mountain that
LINE 161: overhangs it. Soon after, I entered the valley of Chamounix. This
LINE 162: valley is more wonderful and sublime, but not so beautiful and
LINE 163: picturesque as that of Servox, through which I had just passed. The
LINE 164: high and snowy mountains were its immediate boundaries, but I saw no
LINE 165: more ruined castles and fertile fields. Immense glaciers approached
LINE 166: the road; I heard the rumbling thunder of the falling avalanche and
LINE 167: marked the smoke of its passage. Mont Blanc, the supreme and
LINE 168: magnificent Mont Blanc, raised itself from the surrounding _aiguilles_,
LINE 169: and its tremendous _dôme_ overlooked the valley.
LINE 170: A tingling long-lost sense of pleasure often came across me during this
LINE 171: journey. Some turn in the road, some new object suddenly perceived and
LINE 172: recognised, reminded me of days gone by, and were associated with the
LINE 173: lighthearted gaiety of boyhood. The very winds whispered in soothing
LINE 174: accents, and maternal Nature bade me weep no more. Then again the
LINE 175: kindly influence ceased to act—I found myself fettered again to grief
LINE 176: and indulging in all the misery of reflection. Then I spurred on my
LINE 177: animal, striving so to forget the world, my fears, and more than all,
LINE 178: myself—or, in a more desperate fashion, I alighted and threw myself on
LINE 179: the grass, weighed down by horror and despair.
LINE 180: At length I arrived at the village of Chamounix. Exhaustion succeeded
LINE 181: to the extreme fatigue both of body and of mind which I had endured.
LINE 182: For a short space of time I remained at the window watching the pallid
LINE 183: lightnings that played above Mont Blanc and listening to the rushing of
LINE 184: the Arve, which pursued its noisy way beneath. The same lulling sounds
LINE 185: acted as a lullaby to my too keen sensations; when I placed my head
LINE 186: upon my pillow, sleep crept over me; I felt it as it came and blessed
LINE 187: the giver of oblivion.