LINE 1: We were brought up together; there was not quite a year difference in
LINE 2: our ages. I need not say that we were strangers to any species of
LINE 3: disunion or dispute. Harmony was the soul of our companionship, and
LINE 4: the diversity and contrast that subsisted in our characters drew us
LINE 5: nearer together. Elizabeth was of a calmer and more concentrated
LINE 6: disposition; but, with all my ardour, I was capable of a more intense
LINE 7: application and was more deeply smitten with the thirst for knowledge.
LINE 8: She busied herself with following the aerial creations of the poets;
LINE 9: and in the majestic and wondrous scenes which surrounded our Swiss
LINE 10: home —the sublime shapes of the mountains, the changes of the seasons,
LINE 11: tempest and calm, the silence of winter, and the life and turbulence of
LINE 12: our Alpine summers—she found ample scope for admiration and delight.
LINE 13: While my companion contemplated with a serious and satisfied spirit the
LINE 14: magnificent appearances of things, I delighted in investigating their
LINE 15: causes. The world was to me a secret which I desired to divine.
LINE 16: Curiosity, earnest research to learn the hidden laws of nature,
LINE 17: gladness akin to rapture, as they were unfolded to me, are among the
LINE 18: earliest sensations I can remember.
LINE 19: On the birth of a second son, my junior by seven years, my parents gave
LINE 20: up entirely their wandering life and fixed themselves in their native
LINE 21: country. We possessed a house in Geneva, and a _campagne_ on Belrive,
LINE 22: the eastern shore of the lake, at the distance of rather more than a
LINE 23: league from the city. We resided principally in the latter, and the
LINE 24: lives of my parents were passed in considerable seclusion. It was my
LINE 25: temper to avoid a crowd and to attach myself fervently to a few. I was
LINE 26: indifferent, therefore, to my school-fellows in general; but I united
LINE 27: myself in the bonds of the closest friendship to one among them. Henry
LINE 28: Clerval was the son of a merchant of Geneva. He was a boy of singular
LINE 29: talent and fancy. He loved enterprise, hardship, and even danger for
LINE 30: its own sake. He was deeply read in books of chivalry and romance. He
LINE 31: composed heroic songs and began to write many a tale of enchantment and
LINE 32: knightly adventure. He tried to make us act plays and to enter into
LINE 33: masquerades, in which the characters were drawn from the heroes of
LINE 34: Roncesvalles, of the Round Table of King Arthur, and the chivalrous
LINE 35: train who shed their blood to redeem the holy sepulchre from the hands
LINE 36: of the infidels.
LINE 37: No human being could have passed a happier childhood than myself. My
LINE 38: parents were possessed by the very spirit of kindness and indulgence.
LINE 39: We felt that they were not the tyrants to rule our lot according to
LINE 40: their caprice, but the agents and creators of all the many delights
LINE 41: which we enjoyed. When I mingled with other families I distinctly
LINE 42: discerned how peculiarly fortunate my lot was, and gratitude assisted
LINE 43: the development of filial love.
LINE 44: My temper was sometimes violent, and my passions vehement; but by some
LINE 45: law in my temperature they were turned not towards childish pursuits
LINE 46: but to an eager desire to learn, and not to learn all things
LINE 47: indiscriminately. I confess that neither the structure of languages,
LINE 48: nor the code of governments, nor the politics of various states
LINE 49: possessed attractions for me. It was the secrets of heaven and earth
LINE 50: that I desired to learn; and whether it was the outward substance of
LINE 51: things or the inner spirit of nature and the mysterious soul of man
LINE 52: that occupied me, still my inquiries were directed to the metaphysical,
LINE 53: or in its highest sense, the physical secrets of the world.
LINE 54: Meanwhile Clerval occupied himself, so to speak, with the moral
LINE 55: relations of things. The busy stage of life, the virtues of heroes,
LINE 56: and the actions of men were his theme; and his hope and his dream was
LINE 57: to become one among those whose names are recorded in story as the
LINE 58: gallant and adventurous benefactors of our species. The saintly soul
LINE 59: of Elizabeth shone like a shrine-dedicated lamp in our peaceful home.
LINE 60: Her sympathy was ours; her smile, her soft voice, the sweet glance of
LINE 61: her celestial eyes, were ever there to bless and animate us. She was
LINE 62: the living spirit of love to soften and attract; I might have become
LINE 63: sullen in my study, rough through the ardour of my nature, but that
LINE 64: she was there to subdue me to a semblance of her own gentleness. And
LINE 65: Clerval—could aught ill entrench on the noble spirit of Clerval? Yet
LINE 66: he might not have been so perfectly humane, so thoughtful in his
LINE 67: generosity, so full of kindness and tenderness amidst his passion for
LINE 68: adventurous exploit, had she not unfolded to him the real loveliness of
LINE 69: beneficence and made the doing good the end and aim of his soaring
LINE 70: ambition.
LINE 71: I feel exquisite pleasure in dwelling on the recollections of childhood,
LINE 72: before misfortune had tainted my mind and changed its bright visions of
LINE 73: extensive usefulness into gloomy and narrow reflections upon self. Besides,
LINE 74: in drawing the picture of my early days, I also record those events which
LINE 75: led, by insensible steps, to my after tale of misery, for when I would
LINE 76: account to myself for the birth of that passion which afterwards ruled my
LINE 77: destiny I find it arise, like a mountain river, from ignoble and almost
LINE 78: forgotten sources; but, swelling as it proceeded, it became the torrent
LINE 79: which, in its course, has swept away all my hopes and joys.
LINE 80: Natural philosophy is the genius that has regulated my fate; I desire,
LINE 81: therefore, in this narration, to state those facts which led to my
LINE 82: predilection for that science. When I was thirteen years of age we all went
LINE 83: on a party of pleasure to the baths near Thonon; the inclemency of the
LINE 84: weather obliged us to remain a day confined to the inn. In this house I
LINE 85: chanced to find a volume of the works of Cornelius Agrippa. I opened it
LINE 86: with apathy; the theory which he attempts to demonstrate and the wonderful
LINE 87: facts which he relates soon changed this feeling into enthusiasm. A new
LINE 88: light seemed to dawn upon my mind, and bounding with joy, I communicated my
LINE 89: discovery to my father. My father looked carelessly at the title page of my
LINE 90: book and said, "Ah! Cornelius Agrippa! My dear Victor, do not waste
LINE 91: your time upon this; it is sad trash."
LINE 92: If, instead of this remark, my father had taken the pains to explain to me
LINE 93: that the principles of Agrippa had been entirely exploded and that a modern
LINE 94: system of science had been introduced which possessed much greater powers
LINE 95: than the ancient, because the powers of the latter were chimerical, while
LINE 96: those of the former were real and practical, under such circumstances I
LINE 97: should certainly have thrown Agrippa aside and have contented my
LINE 98: imagination, warmed as it was, by returning with greater ardour to my
LINE 99: former studies. It is even possible that the train of my ideas would never
LINE 100: have received the fatal impulse that led to my ruin. But the cursory glance
LINE 101: my father had taken of my volume by no means assured me that he was
LINE 102: acquainted with its contents, and I continued to read with the greatest
LINE 103: avidity.
LINE 104: When I returned home my first care was to procure the whole works of this
LINE 105: author, and afterwards of Paracelsus and Albertus Magnus. I read and
LINE 106: studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me
LINE 107: treasures known to few besides myself. I have described myself as always
LINE 108: having been imbued with a fervent longing to penetrate the secrets of
LINE 109: nature. In spite of the intense labour and wonderful discoveries of modern
LINE 110: philosophers, I always came from my studies discontented and unsatisfied.
LINE 111: Sir Isaac Newton is said to have avowed that he felt like a child picking
LINE 112: up shells beside the great and unexplored ocean of truth. Those of his
LINE 113: successors in each branch of natural philosophy with whom I was acquainted
LINE 114: appeared even to my boy's apprehensions as tyros engaged in the same
LINE 115: pursuit.
LINE 116: The untaught peasant beheld the elements around him and was acquainted
LINE 117: with their practical uses. The most learned philosopher knew little
LINE 118: more. He had partially unveiled the face of Nature, but her immortal
LINE 119: lineaments were still a wonder and a mystery. He might dissect,
LINE 120: anatomise, and give names; but, not to speak of a final cause, causes
LINE 121: in their secondary and tertiary grades were utterly unknown to him. I
LINE 122: had gazed upon the fortifications and impediments that seemed to keep
LINE 123: human beings from entering the citadel of nature, and rashly and
LINE 124: ignorantly I had repined.
LINE 125: But here were books, and here were men who had penetrated deeper and knew
LINE 126: more. I took their word for all that they averred, and I became their
LINE 127: disciple. It may appear strange that such should arise in the eighteenth
LINE 128: century; but while I followed the routine of education in the schools of
LINE 129: Geneva, I was, to a great degree, self-taught with regard to my favourite
LINE 130: studies. My father was not scientific, and I was left to struggle with a
LINE 131: child's blindness, added to a student's thirst for knowledge.
LINE 132: Under the guidance of my new preceptors I entered with the greatest
LINE 133: diligence into the search of the philosopher's stone and the elixir
LINE 134: of life; but the latter soon obtained my undivided attention. Wealth was an
LINE 135: inferior object, but what glory would attend the discovery if I could
LINE 136: banish disease from the human frame and render man invulnerable to any but
LINE 137: a violent death!
LINE 138: Nor were these my only visions. The raising of ghosts or devils was a
LINE 139: promise liberally accorded by my favourite authors, the fulfilment of which
LINE 140: I most eagerly sought; and if my incantations were always unsuccessful, I
LINE 141: attributed the failure rather to my own inexperience and mistake than to a
LINE 142: want of skill or fidelity in my instructors. And thus for a time I was
LINE 143: occupied by exploded systems, mingling, like an unadept, a thousand
LINE 144: contradictory theories and floundering desperately in a very slough of
LINE 145: multifarious knowledge, guided by an ardent imagination and childish
LINE 146: reasoning, till an accident again changed the current of my ideas.
LINE 147: When I was about fifteen years old we had retired to our house near
LINE 148: Belrive, when we witnessed a most violent and terrible thunderstorm. It
LINE 149: advanced from behind the mountains of Jura, and the thunder burst at once
LINE 150: with frightful loudness from various quarters of the heavens. I remained,
LINE 151: while the storm lasted, watching its progress with curiosity and delight.
LINE 152: As I stood at the door, on a sudden I beheld a stream of fire issue from an
LINE 153: old and beautiful oak which stood about twenty yards from our house; and so
LINE 154: soon as the dazzling light vanished, the oak had disappeared, and nothing
LINE 155: remained but a blasted stump. When we visited it the next morning, we found
LINE 156: the tree shattered in a singular manner. It was not splintered by the
LINE 157: shock, but entirely reduced to thin ribbons of wood. I never beheld
LINE 158: anything so utterly destroyed.
LINE 159: Before this I was not unacquainted with the more obvious laws of
LINE 160: electricity. On this occasion a man of great research in natural
LINE 161: philosophy was with us, and excited by this catastrophe, he entered on
LINE 162: the explanation of a theory which he had formed on the subject of
LINE 163: electricity and galvanism, which was at once new and astonishing to me.
LINE 164: All that he said threw greatly into the shade Cornelius Agrippa,
LINE 165: Albertus Magnus, and Paracelsus, the lords of my imagination; but by
LINE 166: some fatality the overthrow of these men disinclined me to pursue my
LINE 167: accustomed studies. It seemed to me as if nothing would or could ever
LINE 168: be known. All that had so long engaged my attention suddenly grew
LINE 169: despicable. By one of those caprices of the mind which we are perhaps
LINE 170: most subject to in early youth, I at once gave up my former
LINE 171: occupations, set down natural history and all its progeny as a deformed
LINE 172: and abortive creation, and entertained the greatest disdain for a
LINE 173: would-be science which could never even step within the threshold of
LINE 174: real knowledge. In this mood of mind I betook myself to the
LINE 175: mathematics and the branches of study appertaining to that science as
LINE 176: being built upon secure foundations, and so worthy of my consideration.
LINE 177: Thus strangely are our souls constructed, and by such slight ligaments
LINE 178: are we bound to prosperity or ruin. When I look back, it seems to me
LINE 179: as if this almost miraculous change of inclination and will was the
LINE 180: immediate suggestion of the guardian angel of my life—the last effort
LINE 181: made by the spirit of preservation to avert the storm that was even
LINE 182: then hanging in the stars and ready to envelop me. Her victory was
LINE 183: announced by an unusual tranquillity and gladness of soul which
LINE 184: followed the relinquishing of my ancient and latterly tormenting
LINE 185: studies. It was thus that I was to be taught to associate evil with
LINE 186: their prosecution, happiness with their disregard.
LINE 187: It was a strong effort of the spirit of good, but it was ineffectual.
LINE 188: Destiny was too potent, and her immutable laws had decreed my utter and
LINE 189: terrible destruction.