LINE 1: The being finished speaking and fixed his looks upon me in the
LINE 2: expectation of a reply. But I was bewildered, perplexed, and unable to
LINE 3: arrange my ideas sufficiently to understand the full extent of his
LINE 4: proposition. He continued,
LINE 5: "You must create a female for me with whom I can live in the
LINE 6: interchange of those sympathies necessary for my being. This you alone
LINE 7: can do, and I demand it of you as a right which you must not refuse to
LINE 8: concede."
LINE 9: The latter part of his tale had kindled anew in me the anger that had
LINE 10: died away while he narrated his peaceful life among the cottagers, and
LINE 11: as he said this I could no longer suppress the rage that burned within
LINE 12: me.
LINE 13: "I do refuse it," I replied; "and no torture shall ever extort a
LINE 14: consent from me. You may render me the most miserable of men, but you
LINE 15: shall never make me base in my own eyes. Shall I create another like
LINE 16: yourself, whose joint wickedness might desolate the world. Begone! I
LINE 17: have answered you; you may torture me, but I will never consent."
LINE 18: "You are in the wrong," replied the fiend; "and instead
LINE 19: of threatening, I am content to reason with you. I am malicious because I
LINE 20: am miserable. Am I not shunned and hated by all mankind? You, my creator,
LINE 21: would tear me to pieces and triumph; remember that, and tell me why I
LINE 22: should pity man more than he pities me? You would not call it murder if you
LINE 23: could precipitate me into one of those ice-rifts and destroy my frame, the
LINE 24: work of your own hands. Shall I respect man when he condemns me? Let him
LINE 25: live with me in the interchange of kindness, and instead of injury I would
LINE 26: bestow every benefit upon him with tears of gratitude at his acceptance.
LINE 27: But that cannot be; the human senses are insurmountable barriers to our
LINE 28: union. Yet mine shall not be the submission of abject slavery. I will
LINE 29: revenge my injuries; if I cannot inspire love, I will cause fear, and
LINE 30: chiefly towards you my arch-enemy, because my creator, do I swear
LINE 31: inextinguishable hatred. Have a care; I will work at your destruction, nor
LINE 32: finish until I desolate your heart, so that you shall curse the hour of
LINE 33: your birth."
LINE 34: A fiendish rage animated him as he said this; his face was wrinkled
LINE 35: into contortions too horrible for human eyes to behold; but presently
LINE 36: he calmed himself and proceeded—
LINE 37: "I intended to reason. This passion is detrimental to me, for you do
LINE 38: not reflect that _you_ are the cause of its excess. If any being felt
LINE 39: emotions of benevolence towards me, I should return them a hundred and a
LINE 40: hundredfold; for that one creature's sake I would make peace with the
LINE 41: whole kind! But I now indulge in dreams of bliss that cannot be realised.
LINE 42: What I ask of you is reasonable and moderate; I demand a creature of
LINE 43: another sex, but as hideous as myself; the gratification is small, but it
LINE 44: is all that I can receive, and it shall content me. It is true, we shall be
LINE 45: monsters, cut off from all the world; but on that account we shall be more
LINE 46: attached to one another. Our lives will not be happy, but they will be
LINE 47: harmless and free from the misery I now feel. Oh! My creator, make me
LINE 48: happy; let me feel gratitude towards you for one benefit! Let me see that I
LINE 49: excite the sympathy of some existing thing; do not deny me my
LINE 50: request!"
LINE 51: I was moved. I shuddered when I thought of the possible consequences
LINE 52: of my consent, but I felt that there was some justice in his argument.
LINE 53: His tale and the feelings he now expressed proved him to be a creature
LINE 54: of fine sensations, and did I not as his maker owe him all the portion
LINE 55: of happiness that it was in my power to bestow? He saw my change of
LINE 56: feeling and continued,
LINE 57: "If you consent, neither you nor any other human being shall ever see
LINE 58: us again; I will go to the vast wilds of South America. My food is not
LINE 59: that of man; I do not destroy the lamb and the kid to glut my appetite;
LINE 60: acorns and berries afford me sufficient nourishment. My companion will
LINE 61: be of the same nature as myself and will be content with the same fare.
LINE 62: We shall make our bed of dried leaves; the sun will shine on us as on
LINE 63: man and will ripen our food. The picture I present to you is peaceful
LINE 64: and human, and you must feel that you could deny it only in the
LINE 65: wantonness of power and cruelty. Pitiless as you have been towards me,
LINE 66: I now see compassion in your eyes; let me seize the favourable moment
LINE 67: and persuade you to promise what I so ardently desire."
LINE 68: "You propose," replied I, "to fly from the habitations of
LINE 69: man, to dwell in those wilds where the beasts of the field will be your
LINE 70: only companions. How can you, who long for the love and sympathy of man,
LINE 71: persevere in this exile? You will return and again seek their kindness, and
LINE 72: you will meet with their detestation; your evil passions will be renewed,
LINE 73: and you will then have a companion to aid you in the task of destruction.
LINE 74: This may not be; cease to argue the point, for I cannot consent."
LINE 75: "How inconstant are your feelings! But a moment ago you were moved by
LINE 76: my representations, and why do you again harden yourself to my complaints?
LINE 77: I swear to you, by the earth which I inhabit, and by you that made me, that
LINE 78: with the companion you bestow, I will quit the neighbourhood of man and
LINE 79: dwell, as it may chance, in the most savage of places. My evil passions
LINE 80: will have fled, for I shall meet with sympathy! My life will flow quietly
LINE 81: away, and in my dying moments I shall not curse my maker."
LINE 82: His words had a strange effect upon me. I compassionated him and
LINE 83: sometimes felt a wish to console him, but when I looked upon him, when
LINE 84: I saw the filthy mass that moved and talked, my heart sickened and my
LINE 85: feelings were altered to those of horror and hatred. I tried to stifle
LINE 86: these sensations; I thought that as I could not sympathise with him, I
LINE 87: had no right to withhold from him the small portion of happiness which
LINE 88: was yet in my power to bestow.
LINE 89: "You swear," I said, "to be harmless; but have you not
LINE 90: already shown a degree of malice that should reasonably make me distrust
LINE 91: you? May not even this be a feint that will increase your triumph by
LINE 92: affording a wider scope for your revenge?"
LINE 93: "How is this? I must not be trifled with, and I demand an answer. If
LINE 94: I have no ties and no affections, hatred and vice must be my portion;
LINE 95: the love of another will destroy the cause of my crimes, and I shall
LINE 96: become a thing of whose existence everyone will be ignorant. My vices
LINE 97: are the children of a forced solitude that I abhor, and my virtues will
LINE 98: necessarily arise when I live in communion with an equal. I shall feel
LINE 99: the affections of a sensitive being and become linked to the chain of
LINE 100: existence and events from which I am now excluded."
LINE 101: I paused some time to reflect on all he had related and the various
LINE 102: arguments which he had employed. I thought of the promise of virtues which
LINE 103: he had displayed on the opening of his existence and the subsequent blight
LINE 104: of all kindly feeling by the loathing and scorn which his protectors had
LINE 105: manifested towards him. His power and threats were not omitted in my
LINE 106: calculations; a creature who could exist in the ice-caves of the glaciers
LINE 107: and hide himself from pursuit among the ridges of inaccessible precipices
LINE 108: was a being possessing faculties it would be vain to cope with. After a
LINE 109: long pause of reflection I concluded that the justice due both to him and
LINE 110: my fellow creatures demanded of me that I should comply with his request.
LINE 111: Turning to him, therefore, I said,
LINE 112: "I consent to your demand, on your solemn oath to quit Europe for ever,
LINE 113: and every other place in the neighbourhood of man, as soon as I shall
LINE 114: deliver into your hands a female who will accompany you in your exile."
LINE 115: "I swear," he cried, "by the sun, and by the blue sky of
LINE 116: heaven, and by the fire of love that burns my heart, that if you grant my
LINE 117: prayer, while they exist you shall never behold me again. Depart to your
LINE 118: home and commence your labours; I shall watch their progress with
LINE 119: unutterable anxiety; and fear not but that when you are ready I shall
LINE 120: appear."
LINE 121: Saying this, he suddenly quitted me, fearful, perhaps, of any change in
LINE 122: my sentiments. I saw him descend the mountain with greater speed than
LINE 123: the flight of an eagle, and quickly lost among the undulations of the
LINE 124: sea of ice.
LINE 125: His tale had occupied the whole day, and the sun was upon the verge of
LINE 126: the horizon when he departed. I knew that I ought to hasten my descent
LINE 127: towards the valley, as I should soon be encompassed in darkness; but my
LINE 128: heart was heavy, and my steps slow. The labour of winding among the
LINE 129: little paths of the mountain and fixing my feet firmly as I advanced
LINE 130: perplexed me, occupied as I was by the emotions which the occurrences
LINE 131: of the day had produced. Night was far advanced when I came to the
LINE 132: halfway resting-place and seated myself beside the fountain. The stars
LINE 133: shone at intervals as the clouds passed from over them; the dark pines
LINE 134: rose before me, and every here and there a broken tree lay on the
LINE 135: ground; it was a scene of wonderful solemnity and stirred strange
LINE 136: thoughts within me. I wept bitterly, and clasping my hands in agony, I
LINE 137: exclaimed, "Oh! stars and clouds and winds, ye are all about to mock
LINE 138: me; if ye really pity me, crush sensation and memory; let me become as
LINE 139: nought; but if not, depart, depart, and leave me in darkness."
LINE 140: These were wild and miserable thoughts, but I cannot describe to you
LINE 141: how the eternal twinkling of the stars weighed upon me and how I
LINE 142: listened to every blast of wind as if it were a dull ugly siroc on its
LINE 143: way to consume me.
LINE 144: Morning dawned before I arrived at the village of Chamounix; I took no
LINE 145: rest, but returned immediately to Geneva. Even in my own heart I could
LINE 146: give no expression to my sensations—they weighed on me with a
LINE 147: mountain's weight and their excess destroyed my agony beneath them.
LINE 148: Thus I returned home, and entering the house, presented myself to the
LINE 149: family. My haggard and wild appearance awoke intense alarm, but I
LINE 150: answered no question, scarcely did I speak. I felt as if I were placed
LINE 151: under a ban—as if I had no right to claim their sympathies—as if
LINE 152: never more might I enjoy companionship with them. Yet even thus I
LINE 153: loved them to adoration; and to save them, I resolved to dedicate
LINE 154: myself to my most abhorred task. The prospect of such an occupation
LINE 155: made every other circumstance of existence pass before me like a dream,
LINE 156: and that thought only had to me the reality of life.