LINE 1: Reader, I married him. A quiet wedding we had: he and I, the parson and
LINE 2: clerk, were alone present. When we got back from church, I went into
LINE 3: the kitchen of the manor-house, where Mary was cooking the dinner and
LINE 4: John cleaning the knives, and I said—
LINE 5: "Mary, I have been married to Mr. Rochester this morning." The
LINE 6: housekeeper and her husband were both of that decent phlegmatic order
LINE 7: of people, to whom one may at any time safely communicate a remarkable
LINE 8: piece of news without incurring the danger of having one's ears pierced
LINE 9: by some shrill ejaculation, and subsequently stunned by a torrent of
LINE 10: wordy wonderment. Mary did look up, and she did stare at me: the ladle
LINE 11: with which she was basting a pair of chickens roasting at the fire, did
LINE 12: for some three minutes hang suspended in air; and for the same space of
LINE 13: time John's knives also had rest from the polishing process: but Mary,
LINE 14: bending again over the roast, said only—
LINE 15: "Have you, Miss? Well, for sure!"
LINE 16: A short time after she pursued—"I seed you go out with the master, but
LINE 17: I didn't know you were gone to church to be wed;" and she basted away.
LINE 18: John, when I turned to him, was grinning from ear to ear.
LINE 19: "I telled Mary how it would be," he said: "I knew what Mr. Edward"
LINE 20: (John was an old servant, and had known his master when he was the
LINE 21: cadet of the house, therefore, he often gave him his Christian name)—"I
LINE 22: knew what Mr. Edward would do; and I was certain he would not wait long
LINE 23: neither: and he's done right, for aught I know. I wish you joy, Miss!"
LINE 24: and he politely pulled his forelock.
LINE 25: "Thank you, John. Mr. Rochester told me to give you and Mary this." I
LINE 26: put into his hand a five-pound note. Without waiting to hear more, I
LINE 27: left the kitchen. In passing the door of that sanctum some time after,
LINE 28: I caught the words—
LINE 29: "She'll happen do better for him nor ony o' t' grand ladies." And
LINE 30: again, "If she ben't one o' th' handsomest, she's noan faâl and varry
LINE 31: good-natured; and i' his een she's fair beautiful, onybody may see
LINE 32: that."
LINE 33: I wrote to Moor House and to Cambridge immediately, to say what I had
LINE 34: done: fully explaining also why I had thus acted. Diana and Mary
LINE 35: approved the step unreservedly. Diana announced that she would just
LINE 36: give me time to get over the honeymoon, and then she would come and see
LINE 37: me.
LINE 38: "She had better not wait till then, Jane," said Mr. Rochester, when I
LINE 39: read her letter to him; "if she does, she will be too late, for our
LINE 40: honeymoon will shine our life long: its beams will only fade over your
LINE 41: grave or mine."
LINE 42: How St. John received the news, I don't know: he never answered the
LINE 43: letter in which I communicated it: yet six months after he wrote to me,
LINE 44: without, however, mentioning Mr. Rochester's name or alluding to my
LINE 45: marriage. His letter was then calm, and, though very serious, kind. He
LINE 46: has maintained a regular, though not frequent, correspondence ever
LINE 47: since: he hopes I am happy, and trusts I am not of those who live
LINE 48: without God in the world, and only mind earthly things.
LINE 49: You have not quite forgotten little Adèle, have you, reader? I had not;
LINE 50: I soon asked and obtained leave of Mr. Rochester, to go and see her at
LINE 51: the school where he had placed her. Her frantic joy at beholding me
LINE 52: again moved me much. She looked pale and thin: she said she was not
LINE 53: happy. I found the rules of the establishment were too strict, its
LINE 54: course of study too severe for a child of her age: I took her home with
LINE 55: me. I meant to become her governess once more, but I soon found this
LINE 56: impracticable; my time and cares were now required by another—my
LINE 57: husband needed them all. So I sought out a school conducted on a more
LINE 58: indulgent system, and near enough to permit of my visiting her often,
LINE 59: and bringing her home sometimes. I took care she should never want for
LINE 60: anything that could contribute to her comfort: she soon settled in her
LINE 61: new abode, became very happy there, and made fair progress in her
LINE 62: studies. As she grew up, a sound English education corrected in a great
LINE 63: measure her French defects; and when she left school, I found in her a
LINE 64: pleasing and obliging companion: docile, good-tempered, and
LINE 65: well-principled. By her grateful attention to me and mine, she has long
LINE 66: since well repaid any little kindness I ever had it in my power to
LINE 67: offer her.
LINE 68: My tale draws to its close: one word respecting my experience of
LINE 69: married life, and one brief glance at the fortunes of those whose names
LINE 70: have most frequently recurred in this narrative, and I have done.
LINE 71: I have now been married ten years. I know what it is to live entirely
LINE 72: for and with what I love best on earth. I hold myself supremely
LINE 73: blest—blest beyond what language can express; because I am my husband's
LINE 74: life as fully as he is mine. No woman was ever nearer to her mate than
LINE 75: I am: ever more absolutely bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh. I
LINE 76: know no weariness of my Edward's society: he knows none of mine, any
LINE 77: more than we each do of the pulsation of the heart that beats in our
LINE 78: separate bosoms; consequently, we are ever together. To be together is
LINE 79: for us to be at once as free as in solitude, as gay as in company. We
LINE 80: talk, I believe, all day long: to talk to each other is but a more
LINE 81: animated and an audible thinking. All my confidence is bestowed on him,
LINE 82: all his confidence is devoted to me; we are precisely suited in
LINE 83: character—perfect concord is the result.
LINE 84: Mr. Rochester continued blind the first two years of our union; perhaps
LINE 85: it was that circumstance that drew us so very near—that knit us so very
LINE 86: close: for I was then his vision, as I am still his right hand.
LINE 87: Literally, I was (what he often called me) the apple of his eye. He saw
LINE 88: nature—he saw books through me; and never did I weary of gazing for his
LINE 89: behalf, and of putting into words the effect of field, tree, town,
LINE 90: river, cloud, sunbeam—of the landscape before us; of the weather round
LINE 91: us—and impressing by sound on his ear what light could no longer stamp
LINE 92: on his eye. Never did I weary of reading to him; never did I weary of
LINE 93: conducting him where he wished to go: of doing for him what he wished
LINE 94: to be done. And there was a pleasure in my services, most full, most
LINE 95: exquisite, even though sad—because he claimed these services without
LINE 96: painful shame or damping humiliation. He loved me so truly, that he
LINE 97: knew no reluctance in profiting by my attendance: he felt I loved him
LINE 98: so fondly, that to yield that attendance was to indulge my sweetest
LINE 99: wishes.
LINE 100: One morning at the end of the two years, as I was writing a letter to
LINE 101: his dictation, he came and bent over me, and said—"Jane, have you a
LINE 102: glittering ornament round your neck?"
LINE 103: I had a gold watch-chain: I answered "Yes."
LINE 104: "And have you a pale blue dress on?"
LINE 105: And have you a pale blue dress on?
LINE 106: I had. He informed me then, that for some time he had fancied the
LINE 107: obscurity clouding one eye was becoming less dense; and that now he was
LINE 108: sure of it.
LINE 109: He and I went up to London. He had the advice of an eminent oculist;
LINE 110: and he eventually recovered the sight of that one eye. He cannot now
LINE 111: see very distinctly: he cannot read or write much; but he can find his
LINE 112: way without being led by the hand: the sky is no longer a blank to
LINE 113: him—the earth no longer a void. When his first-born was put into his
LINE 114: arms, he could see that the boy had inherited his own eyes, as they
LINE 115: once were—large, brilliant, and black. On that occasion, he again, with
LINE 116: a full heart, acknowledged that God had tempered judgment with mercy.
LINE 117: My Edward and I, then, are happy: and the more so, because those we
LINE 118: most love are happy likewise. Diana and Mary Rivers are both married:
LINE 119: alternately, once every year, they come to see us, and we go to see
LINE 120: them. Diana's husband is a captain in the navy, a gallant officer and a
LINE 121: good man. Mary's is a clergyman, a college friend of her brother's,
LINE 122: and, from his attainments and principles, worthy of the connection.
LINE 123: Both Captain Fitzjames and Mr. Wharton love their wives, and are loved
LINE 124: by them.
LINE 125: As to St. John Rivers, he left England: he went to India. He entered on
LINE 126: the path he had marked for himself; he pursues it still. A more
LINE 127: resolute, indefatigable pioneer never wrought amidst rocks and dangers.
LINE 128: Firm, faithful, and devoted, full of energy, and zeal, and truth, he
LINE 129: labours for his race; he clears their painful way to improvement; he
LINE 130: hews down like a giant the prejudices of creed and caste that encumber
LINE 131: it. He may be stern; he may be exacting; he may be ambitious yet; but
LINE 132: his is the sternness of the warrior Greatheart, who guards his pilgrim
LINE 133: convoy from the onslaught of Apollyon. His is the exaction of the
LINE 134: apostle, who speaks but for Christ, when he says—"Whosoever will come
LINE 135: after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me."
LINE 136: His is the ambition of the high master-spirit, which aims to fill a
LINE 137: place in the first rank of those who are redeemed from the earth—who
LINE 138: stand without fault before the throne of God, who share the last mighty
LINE 139: victories of the Lamb, who are called, and chosen, and faithful.
LINE 140: St. John is unmarried: he never will marry now. Himself has hitherto
LINE 141: sufficed to the toil, and the toil draws near its close: his glorious
LINE 142: sun hastens to its setting. The last letter I received from him drew
LINE 143: from my eyes human tears, and yet filled my heart with divine joy: he
LINE 144: anticipated his sure reward, his incorruptible crown. I know that a
LINE 145: stranger's hand will write to me next, to say that the good and
LINE 146: faithful servant has been called at length into the joy of his Lord.
LINE 147: And why weep for this? No fear of death will darken St. John's last
LINE 148: hour: his mind will be unclouded, his heart will be undaunted, his hope
LINE 149: will be sure, his faith steadfast. His own words are a pledge of this—
LINE 150: "My Master," he says, "has forewarned me. Daily He announces more
LINE 151: distinctly,—'Surely I come quickly!' and hourly I more eagerly
LINE 152: respond,—'Amen; even so come, Lord Jesus!'"