LINE 1: In a castle of Westphalia, belonging to the Baron of
LINE 2: Thunder-ten-Tronckh, lived a youth, whom nature had endowed with the
LINE 3: most gentle manners. His countenance was a true picture of his soul. He
LINE 4: combined a true judgment with simplicity of spirit, which was the
LINE 5: reason, I apprehend, of his being called Candide. The old servants of
LINE 6: the family suspected him to have been the son of the Baron's sister, by
LINE 7: a good, honest gentleman of the neighborhood, whom that young lady would
LINE 8: never marry because he had been able to prove only seventy-one
LINE 9: quarterings, the rest of his genealogical tree having been lost through
LINE 10: the injuries of time.
LINE 11: The Baron was one of the most powerful lords in Westphalia, for his
LINE 12: castle had not only a gate, but windows. His great hall, even, was hung
LINE 13: with tapestry. All the dogs of his farm-yards formed a pack of hounds at
LINE 14: need; his grooms were his huntsmen; and the curate of the village was
LINE 15: his grand almoner. They called him "My Lord," and laughed at all his
LINE 16: stories.
LINE 17: The Baron's lady weighed about three hundred and fifty pounds, and was
LINE 18: therefore a person of great consideration, and she did the honours of
LINE 19: the house with a dignity that commanded still greater respect. Her
LINE 20: daughter Cunegonde was seventeen years of age, fresh-coloured, comely,
LINE 21: plump, and desirable. The Baron's son seemed to be in every respect
LINE 22: worthy of his father. The Preceptor Pangloss[1] was the oracle of the
LINE 23: family, and little Candide heard his lessons with all the good faith of
LINE 24: his age and character.
LINE 25: Pangloss was professor of metaphysico-theologico-cosmolo-nigology. He
LINE 26: proved admirably that there is no effect without a cause, and that, in
LINE 27: this best of all possible worlds, the Baron's castle was the most
LINE 28: magnificent of castles, and his lady the best of all possible
LINE 29: Baronesses.
LINE 30: "It is demonstrable," said he, "that things cannot be otherwise than as
LINE 31: they are; for all being created for an end, all is necessarily for the
LINE 32: best end. Observe, that the nose has been formed to bear
LINE 33: spectacles--thus we have spectacles. Legs are visibly designed for
LINE 34: stockings--and we have stockings. Stones were made to be hewn, and to
LINE 35: construct castles--therefore my lord has a magnificent castle; for the
LINE 36: greatest baron in the province ought to be the best lodged. Pigs were
LINE 37: made to be eaten--therefore we eat pork all the year round. Consequently
LINE 38: they who assert that all is well have said a foolish thing, they should
LINE 39: have said all is for the best."
LINE 40: Candide listened attentively and believed innocently; for he thought
LINE 41: Miss Cunegonde extremely beautiful, though he never had the courage to
LINE 42: tell her so. He concluded that after the happiness of being born of
LINE 43: Baron of Thunder-ten-Tronckh, the second degree of happiness was to be
LINE 44: Miss Cunegonde, the third that of seeing her every day, and the fourth
LINE 45: that of hearing Master Pangloss, the greatest philosopher of the whole
LINE 46: province, and consequently of the whole world.
LINE 47: One day Cunegonde, while walking near the castle, in a little wood which
LINE 48: they called a park, saw between the bushes, Dr. Pangloss giving a lesson
LINE 49: in experimental natural philosophy to her mother's chamber-maid, a
LINE 50: little brown wench, very pretty and very docile. As Miss Cunegonde had a
LINE 51: great disposition for the sciences, she breathlessly observed the
LINE 52: repeated experiments of which she was a witness; she clearly perceived
LINE 53: the force of the Doctor's reasons, the effects, and the causes; she
LINE 54: turned back greatly flurried, quite pensive, and filled with the desire
LINE 55: to be learned; dreaming that she might well be a _sufficient reason_ for
LINE 56: young Candide, and he for her.
LINE 57: She met Candide on reaching the castle and blushed; Candide blushed
LINE 58: also; she wished him good morrow in a faltering tone, and Candide spoke
LINE 59: to her without knowing what he said. The next day after dinner, as they
LINE 60: went from table, Cunegonde and Candide found themselves behind a screen;
LINE 61: Cunegonde let fall her handkerchief, Candide picked it up, she took him
LINE 62: innocently by the hand, the youth as innocently kissed the young lady's
LINE 63: hand with particular vivacity, sensibility, and grace; their lips met,
LINE 64: their eyes sparkled, their knees trembled, their hands strayed. Baron
LINE 65: Thunder-ten-Tronckh passed near the screen and beholding this cause and
LINE 66: effect chased Candide from the castle with great kicks on the backside;
LINE 67: Cunegonde fainted away; she was boxed on the ears by the Baroness, as
LINE 68: soon as she came to herself; and all was consternation in this most
LINE 69: magnificent and most agreeable of all possible castles.