LINE 1: There was never anything so gallant, so spruce, so brilliant, and so
LINE 2: well disposed as the two armies. Trumpets, fifes, hautboys, drums, and
LINE 3: cannon made music such as Hell itself had never heard. The cannons first
LINE 4: of all laid flat about six thousand men on each side; the muskets swept
LINE 5: away from this best of worlds nine or ten thousand ruffians who infested
LINE 6: its surface. The bayonet was also a _sufficient reason_ for the death of
LINE 7: several thousands. The whole might amount to thirty thousand souls.
LINE 8: Candide, who trembled like a philosopher, hid himself as well as he
LINE 9: could during this heroic butchery.
LINE 10: At length, while the two kings were causing Te Deum to be sung each in
LINE 11: his own camp, Candide resolved to go and reason elsewhere on effects and
LINE 12: causes. He passed over heaps of dead and dying, and first reached a
LINE 13: neighbouring village; it was in cinders, it was an Abare village which
LINE 14: the Bulgarians had burnt according to the laws of war. Here, old men
LINE 15: covered with wounds, beheld their wives, hugging their children to their
LINE 16: bloody breasts, massacred before their faces; there, their daughters,
LINE 17: disembowelled and breathing their last after having satisfied the
LINE 18: natural wants of Bulgarian heroes; while others, half burnt in the
LINE 19: flames, begged to be despatched. The earth was strewed with brains,
LINE 20: arms, and legs.
LINE 21: Candide fled quickly to another village; it belonged to the Bulgarians;
LINE 22: and the Abarian heroes had treated it in the same way. Candide, walking
LINE 23: always over palpitating limbs or across ruins, arrived at last beyond
LINE 24: the seat of war, with a few provisions in his knapsack, and Miss
LINE 25: Cunegonde always in his heart. His provisions failed him when he arrived
LINE 26: in Holland; but having heard that everybody was rich in that country,
LINE 27: and that they were Christians, he did not doubt but he should meet with
LINE 28: the same treatment from them as he had met with in the Baron's castle,
LINE 29: before Miss Cunegonde's bright eyes were the cause of his expulsion
LINE 30: thence.
LINE 31: He asked alms of several grave-looking people, who all answered him,
LINE 32: that if he continued to follow this trade they would confine him to the
LINE 33: house of correction, where he should be taught to get a living.
LINE 34: The next he addressed was a man who had been haranguing a large assembly
LINE 35: for a whole hour on the subject of charity. But the orator, looking
LINE 36: askew, said:
LINE 37: "What are you doing here? Are you for the good cause?"
LINE 38: "There can be no effect without a cause," modestly answered Candide;
LINE 39: "the whole is necessarily concatenated and arranged for the best. It was
LINE 40: necessary for me to have been banished from the presence of Miss
LINE 41: Cunegonde, to have afterwards run the gauntlet, and now it is necessary
LINE 42: I should beg my bread until I learn to earn it; all this cannot be
LINE 43: otherwise."
LINE 44: "My friend," said the orator to him, "do you believe the Pope to be
LINE 45: Anti-Christ?"
LINE 46: "I have not heard it," answered Candide; "but whether he be, or whether
LINE 47: he be not, I want bread."
LINE 48: "Thou dost not deserve to eat," said the other. "Begone, rogue; begone,
LINE 49: wretch; do not come near me again."
LINE 50: The orator's wife, putting her head out of the window, and spying a man
LINE 51: that doubted whether the Pope was Anti-Christ, poured over him a
LINE 52: full.... Oh, heavens! to what excess does religious zeal carry the
LINE 53: ladies.
LINE 54: A man who had never been christened, a good Anabaptist, named James,
LINE 55: beheld the cruel and ignominious treatment shown to one of his
LINE 56: brethren, an unfeathered biped with a rational soul, he took him home,
LINE 57: cleaned him, gave him bread and beer, presented him with two florins,
LINE 58: and even wished to teach him the manufacture of Persian stuffs which
LINE 59: they make in Holland. Candide, almost prostrating himself before him,
LINE 60: cried:
LINE 61: "Master Pangloss has well said that all is for the best in this world,
LINE 62: for I am infinitely more touched by your extreme generosity than with
LINE 63: the inhumanity of that gentleman in the black coat and his lady."
LINE 64: The next day, as he took a walk, he met a beggar all covered with scabs,
LINE 65: his eyes diseased, the end of his nose eaten away, his mouth distorted,
LINE 66: his teeth black, choking in his throat, tormented with a violent cough,
LINE 67: and spitting out a tooth at each effort.