LINE 1: This Issachar was the most choleric Hebrew that had ever been seen in
LINE 2: Israel since the Captivity in Babylon.
LINE 3: "What!" said he, "thou bitch of a Galilean, was not the Inquisitor
LINE 4: enough for thee? Must this rascal also share with me?"
LINE 5: In saying this he drew a long poniard which he always carried about him;
LINE 6: and not imagining that his adversary had any arms he threw himself upon
LINE 7: Candide: but our honest Westphalian had received a handsome sword from
LINE 8: the old woman along with the suit of clothes. He drew his rapier,
LINE 9: despite his gentleness, and laid the Israelite stone dead upon the
LINE 10: cushions at Cunegonde's feet.
LINE 11: "Holy Virgin!" cried she, "what will become of us? A man killed in my
LINE 12: apartment! If the officers of justice come, we are lost!"
LINE 13: "Had not Pangloss been hanged," said Candide, "he would give us good
LINE 14: counsel in this emergency, for he was a profound philosopher. Failing
LINE 15: him let us consult the old woman."
LINE 16: She was very prudent and commenced to give her opinion when suddenly
LINE 17: another little door opened. It was an hour after midnight, it was the
LINE 18: beginning of Sunday. This day belonged to my lord the Inquisitor. He
LINE 19: entered, and saw the whipped Candide, sword in hand, a dead man upon the
LINE 20: floor, Cunegonde aghast, and the old woman giving counsel.
LINE 21: At this moment, the following is what passed in the soul of Candide, and
LINE 22: how he reasoned:
LINE 23: If this holy man call in assistance, he will surely have me burnt; and
LINE 24: Cunegonde will perhaps be served in the same manner; he was the cause of
LINE 25: my being cruelly whipped; he is my rival; and, as I have now begun to
LINE 26: kill, I will kill away, for there is no time to hesitate. This reasoning
LINE 27: was clear and instantaneous; so that without giving time to the
LINE 28: Inquisitor to recover from his surprise, he pierced him through and
LINE 29: through, and cast him beside the Jew.
LINE 30: "Yet again!" said Cunegonde, "now there is no mercy for us, we are
LINE 31: excommunicated, our last hour has come. How could you do it? you,
LINE 32: naturally so gentle, to slay a Jew and a prelate in two minutes!"
LINE 33: "My beautiful young lady," responded Candide, "when one is a lover,
LINE 34: jealous and whipped by the Inquisition, one stops at nothing."
LINE 35: The old woman then put in her word, saying:
LINE 36: "There are three Andalusian horses in the stable with bridles and
LINE 37: saddles, let the brave Candide get them ready; madame has money, jewels;
LINE 38: let us therefore mount quickly on horseback, though I can sit only on
LINE 39: one buttock; let us set out for Cadiz, it is the finest weather in the
LINE 40: world, and there is great pleasure in travelling in the cool of the
LINE 41: night."
LINE 42: Immediately Candide saddled the three horses, and Cunegonde, the old
LINE 43: woman and he, travelled thirty miles at a stretch. While they were
LINE 44: journeying, the Holy Brotherhood entered the house; my lord the
LINE 45: Inquisitor was interred in a handsome church, and Issachar's body was
LINE 46: thrown upon a dunghill.
LINE 47: Candide, Cunegonde, and the old woman, had now reached the little town
LINE 48: of Avacena in the midst of the mountains of the Sierra Morena, and were
LINE 49: speaking as follows in a public inn.