LINE 1: Half dead of that inconceivable anguish which the rolling of a ship
LINE 2: produces, one-half of the passengers were not even sensible of the
LINE 3: danger. The other half shrieked and prayed. The sheets were rent, the
LINE 4: masts broken, the vessel gaped. Work who would, no one heard, no one
LINE 5: commanded. The Anabaptist being upon deck bore a hand; when a brutish
LINE 6: sailor struck him roughly and laid him sprawling; but with the violence
LINE 7: of the blow he himself tumbled head foremost overboard, and stuck upon a
LINE 8: piece of the broken mast. Honest James ran to his assistance, hauled him
LINE 9: up, and from the effort he made was precipitated into the sea in sight
LINE 10: of the sailor, who left him to perish, without deigning to look at him.
LINE 11: Candide drew near and saw his benefactor, who rose above the water one
LINE 12: moment and was then swallowed up for ever. He was just going to jump
LINE 13: after him, but was prevented by the philosopher Pangloss, who
LINE 14: demonstrated to him that the Bay of Lisbon had been made on purpose for
LINE 15: the Anabaptist to be drowned. While he was proving this _à priori_, the
LINE 16: ship foundered; all perished except Pangloss, Candide, and that brutal
LINE 17: sailor who had drowned the good Anabaptist. The villain swam safely to
LINE 18: the shore, while Pangloss and Candide were borne thither upon a plank.
LINE 19: As soon as they recovered themselves a little they walked toward Lisbon.
LINE 20: They had some money left, with which they hoped to save themselves from
LINE 21: starving, after they had escaped drowning. Scarcely had they reached the
LINE 22: city, lamenting the death of their benefactor, when they felt the earth
LINE 23: tremble under their feet. The sea swelled and foamed in the harbour, and
LINE 24: beat to pieces the vessels riding at anchor. Whirlwinds of fire and
LINE 25: ashes covered the streets and public places; houses fell, roofs were
LINE 26: flung upon the pavements, and the pavements were scattered. Thirty
LINE 27: thousand inhabitants of all ages and sexes were crushed under the
LINE 28: ruins.[4] The sailor, whistling and swearing, said there was booty to be
LINE 29: gained here.
LINE 30: "What can be the _sufficient reason_ of this phenomenon?" said Pangloss.
LINE 31: "This is the Last Day!" cried Candide.
LINE 32: The sailor ran among the ruins, facing death to find money; finding it,
LINE 33: he took it, got drunk, and having slept himself sober, purchased the
LINE 34: favours of the first good-natured wench whom he met on the ruins of the
LINE 35: destroyed houses, and in the midst of the dying and the dead. Pangloss
LINE 36: pulled him by the sleeve.
LINE 37: "My friend," said he, "this is not right. You sin against the _universal
LINE 38: reason_; you choose your time badly."
LINE 39: "S'blood and fury!" answered the other; "I am a sailor and born at
LINE 40: Batavia. Four times have I trampled upon the crucifix in four voyages to
LINE 41: Japan[5]; a fig for thy universal reason."
LINE 42: Some falling stones had wounded Candide. He lay stretched in the street
LINE 43: covered with rubbish.
LINE 44: "Alas!" said he to Pangloss, "get me a little wine and oil; I am dying."
LINE 45: "This concussion of the earth is no new thing," answered Pangloss. "The
LINE 46: city of Lima, in America, experienced the same convulsions last year;
LINE 47: the same cause, the same effects; there is certainly a train of sulphur
LINE 48: under ground from Lima to Lisbon."
LINE 49: "Nothing more probable," said Candide; "but for the love of God a little
LINE 50: oil and wine."
LINE 51: "How, probable?" replied the philosopher. "I maintain that the point is
LINE 52: capable of being demonstrated."
LINE 53: Candide fainted away, and Pangloss fetched him some water from a
LINE 54: neighbouring fountain. The following day they rummaged among the ruins
LINE 55: and found provisions, with which they repaired their exhausted strength.
LINE 56: After this they joined with others in relieving those inhabitants who
LINE 57: had escaped death. Some, whom they had succoured, gave them as good a
LINE 58: dinner as they could in such disastrous circumstances; true, the repast
LINE 59: was mournful, and the company moistened their bread with tears; but
LINE 60: Pangloss consoled them, assuring them that things could not be
LINE 61: otherwise.
LINE 62: "For," said he, "all that is is for the best. If there is a volcano at
LINE 63: Lisbon it cannot be elsewhere. It is impossible that things should be
LINE 64: other than they are; for everything is right."
LINE 65: A little man dressed in black, Familiar of the Inquisition, who sat by
LINE 66: him, politely took up his word and said:
LINE 67: "Apparently, then, sir, you do not believe in original sin; for if all
LINE 68: is for the best there has then been neither Fall nor punishment."
LINE 69: "I humbly ask your Excellency's pardon," answered Pangloss, still more
LINE 70: politely; "for the Fall and curse of man necessarily entered into the
LINE 71: system of the best of worlds."
LINE 72: "Sir," said the Familiar, "you do not then believe in liberty?"
LINE 73: "Your Excellency will excuse me," said Pangloss; "liberty is consistent
LINE 74: with absolute necessity, for it was necessary we should be free; for, in
LINE 75: short, the determinate will----"
LINE 76: Pangloss was in the middle of his sentence, when the Familiar beckoned
LINE 77: to his footman, who gave him a glass of wine from Porto or Opporto.