LINE 1: After the earthquake had destroyed three-fourths of Lisbon, the sages of
LINE 2: that country could think of no means more effectual to prevent utter
LINE 3: ruin than to give the people a beautiful _auto-da-fé_[6]; for it had
LINE 4: been decided by the University of Coimbra, that the burning of a few
LINE 5: people alive by a slow fire, and with great ceremony, is an infallible
LINE 6: secret to hinder the earth from quaking.
LINE 7: In consequence hereof, they had seized on a Biscayner, convicted of
LINE 8: having married his godmother, and on two Portuguese, for rejecting the
LINE 9: bacon which larded a chicken they were eating[7]; after dinner, they
LINE 10: came and secured Dr. Pangloss, and his disciple Candide, the one for
LINE 11: speaking his mind, the other for having listened with an air of
LINE 12: approbation. They were conducted to separate apartments, extremely cold,
LINE 13: as they were never incommoded by the sun. Eight days after they were
LINE 14: dressed in _san-benitos_[8] and their heads ornamented with paper
LINE 15: mitres. The mitre and _san-benito_ belonging to Candide were painted
LINE 16: with reversed flames and with devils that had neither tails nor claws;
LINE 17: but Pangloss's devils had claws and tails and the flames were upright.
LINE 18: They marched in procession thus habited and heard a very pathetic
LINE 19: sermon, followed by fine church music. Candide was whipped in cadence
LINE 20: while they were singing; the Biscayner, and the two men who had refused
LINE 21: to eat bacon, were burnt; and Pangloss was hanged, though that was not
LINE 22: the custom. The same day the earth sustained a most violent concussion.
LINE 23: Candide, terrified, amazed, desperate, all bloody, all palpitating, said
LINE 24: to himself:
LINE 25: "If this is the best of possible worlds, what then are the others? Well,
LINE 26: if I had been only whipped I could put up with it, for I experienced
LINE 27: that among the Bulgarians; but oh, my dear Pangloss! thou greatest of
LINE 28: philosophers, that I should have seen you hanged, without knowing for
LINE 29: what! Oh, my dear Anabaptist, thou best of men, that thou should'st have
LINE 30: been drowned in the very harbour! Oh, Miss Cunegonde, thou pearl of
LINE 31: girls! that thou should'st have had thy belly ripped open!"
LINE 32: Thus he was musing, scarce able to stand, preached at, whipped,
LINE 33: absolved, and blessed, when an old woman accosted him saying:
LINE 34: "My son, take courage and follow me."