LINE 1: "Who was it that robbed me of my money and jewels?" said Cunegonde, all
LINE 2: bathed in tears. "How shall we live? What shall we do? Where find
LINE 3: Inquisitors or Jews who will give me more?"
LINE 4: "Alas!" said the old woman, "I have a shrewd suspicion of a reverend
LINE 5: Grey Friar, who stayed last night in the same inn with us at Badajos.
LINE 6: God preserve me from judging rashly, but he came into our room twice,
LINE 7: and he set out upon his journey long before us."
LINE 8: "Alas!" said Candide, "dear Pangloss has often demonstrated to me that
LINE 9: the goods of this world are common to all men, and that each has an
LINE 10: equal right to them. But according to these principles the Grey Friar
LINE 11: ought to have left us enough to carry us through our journey. Have you
LINE 12: nothing at all left, my dear Cunegonde?"
LINE 13: "Not a farthing," said she.
LINE 14: "What then must we do?" said Candide.
LINE 15: "Sell one of the horses," replied the old woman. "I will ride behind
LINE 16: Miss Cunegonde, though I can hold myself only on one buttock, and we
LINE 17: shall reach Cadiz."
LINE 18: In the same inn there was a Benedictine prior who bought the horse for a
LINE 19: cheap price. Candide, Cunegonde, and the old woman, having passed
LINE 20: through Lucena, Chillas, and Lebrixa, arrived at length at Cadiz. A
LINE 21: fleet was there getting ready, and troops assembling to bring to reason
LINE 22: the reverend Jesuit Fathers of Paraguay, accused of having made one of
LINE 23: the native tribes in the neighborhood of San Sacrament revolt against
LINE 24: the Kings of Spain and Portugal. Candide having been in the Bulgarian
LINE 25: service, performed the military exercise before the general of this
LINE 26: little army with so graceful an address, with so intrepid an air, and
LINE 27: with such agility and expedition, that he was given the command of a
LINE 28: company of foot. Now, he was a captain! He set sail with Miss Cunegonde,
LINE 29: the old woman, two valets, and the two Andalusian horses, which had
LINE 30: belonged to the grand Inquisitor of Portugal.
LINE 31: During their voyage they reasoned a good deal on the philosophy of poor
LINE 32: Pangloss.
LINE 33: "We are going into another world," said Candide; "and surely it must be
LINE 34: there that all is for the best. For I must confess there is reason to
LINE 35: complain a little of what passeth in our world in regard to both
LINE 36: natural and moral philosophy."
LINE 37: "I love you with all my heart," said Cunegonde; "but my soul is still
LINE 38: full of fright at that which I have seen and experienced."
LINE 39: "All will be well," replied Candide; "the sea of this new world is
LINE 40: already better than our European sea; it is calmer, the winds more
LINE 41: regular. It is certainly the New World which is the best of all possible
LINE 42: worlds."
LINE 43: "God grant it," said Cunegonde; "but I have been so horribly unhappy
LINE 44: there that my heart is almost closed to hope."
LINE 45: "You complain," said the old woman; "alas! you have not known such
LINE 46: misfortunes as mine."
LINE 47: Cunegonde almost broke out laughing, finding the good woman very
LINE 48: amusing, for pretending to have been as unfortunate as she.
LINE 49: "Alas!" said Cunegonde, "my good mother, unless you have been ravished
LINE 50: by two Bulgarians, have received two deep wounds in your belly, have had
LINE 51: two castles demolished, have had two mothers cut to pieces before your
LINE 52: eyes, and two of your lovers whipped at an _auto-da-fé_, I do not
LINE 53: conceive how you could be more unfortunate than I. Add that I was born a
LINE 54: baroness of seventy-two quarterings--and have been a cook!"
LINE 55: "Miss," replied the old woman, "you do not know my birth; and were I to
LINE 56: show you my backside, you would not talk in that manner, but would
LINE 57: suspend your judgment."
LINE 58: This speech having raised extreme curiosity in the minds of Cunegonde
LINE 59: and Candide, the old woman spoke to them as follows.