LINE 1: "I had not always bleared eyes and red eyelids; neither did my nose
LINE 2: always touch my chin; nor was I always a servant. I am the daughter of
LINE 3: Pope Urban X,[10] and of the Princess of Palestrina. Until the age of
LINE 4: fourteen I was brought up in a palace, to which all the castles of your
LINE 5: German barons would scarcely have served for stables; and one of my
LINE 6: robes was worth more than all the magnificence of Westphalia. As I grew
LINE 7: up I improved in beauty, wit, and every graceful accomplishment, in the
LINE 8: midst of pleasures, hopes, and respectful homage. Already I inspired
LINE 9: love. My throat was formed, and such a throat! white, firm, and shaped
LINE 10: like that of the Venus of Medici; and what eyes! what eyelids! what
LINE 11: black eyebrows! such flames darted from my dark pupils that they
LINE 12: eclipsed the scintillation of the stars--as I was told by the poets in
LINE 13: our part of the world. My waiting women, when dressing and undressing
LINE 14: me, used to fall into an ecstasy, whether they viewed me before or
LINE 15: behind; how glad would the gentlemen have been to perform that office
LINE 16: for them!
LINE 17: "I was affianced to the most excellent Prince of Massa Carara. Such a
LINE 18: prince! as handsome as myself, sweet-tempered, agreeable, brilliantly
LINE 19: witty, and sparkling with love. I loved him as one loves for the first
LINE 20: time--with idolatry, with transport. The nuptials were prepared. There
LINE 21: was surprising pomp and magnificence; there were _fêtes_, carousals,
LINE 22: continual _opera bouffe_; and all Italy composed sonnets in my praise,
LINE 23: though not one of them was passable. I was just upon the point of
LINE 24: reaching the summit of bliss, when an old marchioness who had been
LINE 25: mistress to the Prince, my husband, invited him to drink chocolate with
LINE 26: her. He died in less than two hours of most terrible convulsions. But
LINE 27: this is only a bagatelle. My mother, in despair, and scarcely less
LINE 28: afflicted than myself, determined to absent herself for some time from
LINE 29: so fatal a place. She had a very fine estate in the neighbourhood of
LINE 30: Gaeta. We embarked on board a galley of the country which was gilded
LINE 31: like the great altar of St. Peter's at Rome. A Sallee corsair swooped
LINE 32: down and boarded us. Our men defended themselves like the Pope's
LINE 33: soldiers; they flung themselves upon their knees, and threw down their
LINE 34: arms, begging of the corsair an absolution _in articulo mortis_.
LINE 35: "Instantly they were stripped as bare as monkeys; my mother, our maids
LINE 36: of honour, and myself were all served in the same manner. It is amazing
LINE 37: with what expedition those gentry undress people. But what surprised me
LINE 38: most was, that they thrust their fingers into the part of our bodies
LINE 39: which the generality of women suffer no other instrument but--pipes to
LINE 40: enter. It appeared to me a very strange kind of ceremony; but thus one
LINE 41: judges of things when one has not seen the world. I afterwards learnt
LINE 42: that it was to try whether we had concealed any diamonds. This is the
LINE 43: practice established from time immemorial, among civilised nations that
LINE 44: scour the seas. I was informed that the very religious Knights of Malta
LINE 45: never fail to make this search when they take any Turkish prisoners of
LINE 46: either sex. It is a law of nations from which they never deviate.
LINE 47: "I need not tell _you_ how great a hardship it was for a young princess
LINE 48: and her mother to be made slaves and carried to Morocco. You may easily
LINE 49: imagine all we had to suffer on board the pirate vessel. My mother was
LINE 50: still very handsome; our maids of honour, and even our waiting women,
LINE 51: had more charms than are to be found in all Africa. As for myself, I was
LINE 52: ravishing, was exquisite, grace itself, and I was a virgin! I did not
LINE 53: remain so long; this flower, which had been reserved for the handsome
LINE 54: Prince of Massa Carara, was plucked by the corsair captain. He was an
LINE 55: abominable negro, and yet believed that he did me a great deal of
LINE 56: honour. Certainly the Princess of Palestrina and myself must have been
LINE 57: very strong to go through all that we experienced until our arrival at
LINE 58: Morocco. But let us pass on; these are such common things as not to be
LINE 59: worth mentioning.
LINE 60: "Morocco swam in blood when we arrived. Fifty sons of the Emperor
LINE 61: Muley-Ismael[11] had each their adherents; this produced fifty civil
LINE 62: wars, of blacks against blacks, and blacks against tawnies, and tawnies
LINE 63: against tawnies, and mulattoes against mulattoes. In short it was a
LINE 64: continual carnage throughout the empire.
LINE 65: "No sooner were we landed, than the blacks of a contrary faction to that
LINE 66: of my captain attempted to rob him of his booty. Next to jewels and gold
LINE 67: we were the most valuable things he had. I was witness to such a battle
LINE 68: as you have never seen in your European climates. The northern nations
LINE 69: have not that heat in their blood, nor that raging lust for women, so
LINE 70: common in Africa. It seems that you Europeans have only milk in your
LINE 71: veins; but it is vitriol, it is fire which runs in those of the
LINE 72: inhabitants of Mount Atlas and the neighbouring countries. They fought
LINE 73: with the fury of the lions, tigers, and serpents of the country, to see
LINE 74: who should have us. A Moor seized my mother by the right arm, while my
LINE 75: captain's lieutenant held her by the left; a Moorish soldier had hold of
LINE 76: her by one leg, and one of our corsairs held her by the other. Thus
LINE 77: almost all our women were drawn in quarters by four men. My captain
LINE 78: concealed me behind him; and with his drawn scimitar cut and slashed
LINE 79: every one that opposed his fury. At length I saw all our Italian women,
LINE 80: and my mother herself, torn, mangled, massacred, by the monsters who
LINE 81: disputed over them. The slaves, my companions, those who had taken them,
LINE 82: soldiers, sailors, blacks, whites, mulattoes, and at last my captain,
LINE 83: all were killed, and I remained dying on a heap of dead. Such scenes as
LINE 84: this were transacted through an extent of three hundred leagues--and yet
LINE 85: they never missed the five prayers a day ordained by Mahomet.
LINE 86: "With difficulty I disengaged myself from such a heap of slaughtered
LINE 87: bodies, and crawled to a large orange tree on the bank of a neighbouring
LINE 88: rivulet, where I fell, oppressed with fright, fatigue, horror, despair,
LINE 89: and hunger. Immediately after, my senses, overpowered, gave themselves
LINE 90: up to sleep, which was yet more swooning than repose. I was in this
LINE 91: state of weakness and insensibility, between life and death, when I
LINE 92: felt myself pressed by something that moved upon my body. I opened my
LINE 93: eyes, and saw a white man, of good countenance, who sighed, and who said
LINE 94: between his teeth: '_O che sciagura d'essere senza coglioni!_'"[12]