LINE 1: The beautiful Cunegonde having heard the old woman's history, paid her
LINE 2: all the civilities due to a person of her rank and merit. She likewise
LINE 3: accepted her proposal, and engaged all the passengers, one after the
LINE 4: other, to relate their adventures; and then both she and Candide allowed
LINE 5: that the old woman was in the right.
LINE 6: "It is a great pity," said Candide, "that the sage Pangloss was hanged
LINE 7: contrary to custom at an _auto-da-fé_; he would tell us most amazing
LINE 8: things in regard to the physical and moral evils that overspread earth
LINE 9: and sea, and I should be able, with due respect, to make a few
LINE 10: objections."
LINE 11: While each passenger was recounting his story, the ship made her way.
LINE 12: They landed at Buenos Ayres. Cunegonde, Captain Candide, and the old
LINE 13: woman, waited on the Governor, Don Fernando d'Ibaraa, y Figueora, y
LINE 14: Mascarenes, y Lampourdos, y Souza. This nobleman had a stateliness
LINE 15: becoming a person who bore so many names. He spoke to men with so noble
LINE 16: a disdain, carried his nose so loftily, raised his voice so
LINE 17: unmercifully, assumed so imperious an air, and stalked with such
LINE 18: intolerable pride, that those who saluted him were strongly inclined to
LINE 19: give him a good drubbing. Cunegonde appeared to him the most beautiful
LINE 20: he had ever met. The first thing he did was to ask whether she was not
LINE 21: the captain's wife. The manner in which he asked the question alarmed
LINE 22: Candide; he durst not say she was his wife, because indeed she was not;
LINE 23: neither durst he say she was his sister, because it was not so; and
LINE 24: although this obliging lie had been formerly much in favour among the
LINE 25: ancients, and although it could be useful to the moderns, his soul was
LINE 26: too pure to betray the truth.
LINE 27: "Miss Cunegonde," said he, "is to do me the honour to marry me, and we
LINE 28: beseech your excellency to deign to sanction our marriage."
LINE 29: Don Fernando d'Ibaraa, y Figueora, y Mascarenes, y Lampourdos, y Souza,
LINE 30: turning up his moustachios, smiled mockingly, and ordered Captain
LINE 31: Candide to go and review his company. Candide obeyed, and the Governor
LINE 32: remained alone with Miss Cunegonde. He declared his passion, protesting
LINE 33: he would marry her the next day in the face of the church, or otherwise,
LINE 34: just as should be agreeable to herself. Cunegonde asked a quarter of an
LINE 35: hour to consider of it, to consult the old woman, and to take her
LINE 36: resolution.
LINE 37: The old woman spoke thus to Cunegonde:
LINE 38: "Miss, you have seventy-two quarterings, and not a farthing; it is now
LINE 39: in your power to be wife to the greatest lord in South America, who has
LINE 40: very beautiful moustachios. Is it for you to pique yourself upon
LINE 41: inviolable fidelity? You have been ravished by Bulgarians; a Jew and an
LINE 42: Inquisitor have enjoyed your favours. Misfortune gives sufficient
LINE 43: excuse. I own, that if I were in your place, I should have no scruple in
LINE 44: marrying the Governor and in making the fortune of Captain Candide."
LINE 45: While the old woman spoke with all the prudence which age and experience
LINE 46: gave, a small ship entered the port on board of which were an Alcalde
LINE 47: and his alguazils, and this was what had happened.
LINE 48: As the old woman had shrewdly guessed, it was a Grey Friar who stole
LINE 49: Cunegonde's money and jewels in the town of Badajos, when she and
LINE 50: Candide were escaping. The Friar wanted to sell some of the diamonds to
LINE 51: a jeweller; the jeweller knew them to be the Grand Inquisitor's. The
LINE 52: Friar before he was hanged confessed he had stolen them. He described
LINE 53: the persons, and the route they had taken. The flight of Cunegonde and
LINE 54: Candide was already known. They were traced to Cadiz. A vessel was
LINE 55: immediately sent in pursuit of them. The vessel was already in the port
LINE 56: of Buenos Ayres. The report spread that the Alcalde was going to land,
LINE 57: and that he was in pursuit of the murderers of my lord the Grand
LINE 58: Inquisitor. The prudent old woman saw at once what was to be done.
LINE 59: "You cannot run away," said she to Cunegonde, "and you have nothing to
LINE 60: fear, for it was not you that killed my lord; besides the Governor who
LINE 61: loves you will not suffer you to be ill-treated; therefore stay."
LINE 62: She then ran immediately to Candide.
LINE 63: "Fly," said she, "or in an hour you will be burnt."
LINE 64: There was not a moment to lose; but how could he part from Cunegonde,
LINE 65: and where could he flee for shelter?