LINE 1: "I shall have ever present to my memory the dreadful day, on which I saw
LINE 2: my father and mother killed, and my sister ravished. When the Bulgarians
LINE 3: retired, my dear sister could not be found; but my mother, my father,
LINE 4: and myself, with two maid-servants and three little boys all of whom had
LINE 5: been slain, were put in a hearse, to be conveyed for interment to a
LINE 6: chapel belonging to the Jesuits, within two leagues of our family seat.
LINE 7: A Jesuit sprinkled us with some holy water; it was horribly salt; a few
LINE 8: drops of it fell into my eyes; the father perceived that my eyelids
LINE 9: stirred a little; he put his hand upon my heart and felt it beat. I
LINE 10: received assistance, and at the end of three weeks I recovered. You
LINE 11: know, my dear Candide, I was very pretty; but I grew much prettier, and
LINE 12: the reverend Father Didrie,[16] Superior of that House, conceived the
LINE 13: tenderest friendship for me; he gave me the habit of the order, some
LINE 14: years after I was sent to Rome. The Father-General needed new levies of
LINE 15: young German-Jesuits. The sovereigns of Paraguay admit as few Spanish
LINE 16: Jesuits as possible; they prefer those of other nations as being more
LINE 17: subordinate to their commands. I was judged fit by the reverend
LINE 18: Father-General to go and work in this vineyard. We set out--a Pole, a
LINE 19: Tyrolese, and myself. Upon my arrival I was honoured with a
LINE 20: sub-deaconship and a lieutenancy. I am to-day colonel and priest. We
LINE 21: shall give a warm reception to the King of Spain's troops; I will answer
LINE 22: for it that they shall be excommunicated and well beaten. Providence
LINE 23: sends you here to assist us. But is it, indeed, true that my dear sister
LINE 24: Cunegonde is in the neighbourhood, with the Governor of Buenos Ayres?"
LINE 25: Candide assured him on oath that nothing was more true, and their tears
LINE 26: began afresh.
LINE 27: The Baron could not refrain from embracing Candide; he called him his
LINE 28: brother, his saviour.
LINE 29: "Ah! perhaps," said he, "we shall together, my dear Candide, enter the
LINE 30: town as conquerors, and recover my sister Cunegonde."
LINE 31: "That is all I want," said Candide, "for I intended to marry her, and I
LINE 32: still hope to do so."
LINE 33: "You insolent!" replied the Baron, "would you have the impudence to
LINE 34: marry my sister who has seventy-two quarterings! I find thou hast the
LINE 35: most consummate effrontery to dare to mention so presumptuous a design!"
LINE 36: Candide, petrified at this speech, made answer:
LINE 37: "Reverend Father, all the quarterings in the world signify nothing; I
LINE 38: rescued your sister from the arms of a Jew and of an Inquisitor; she has
LINE 39: great obligations to me, she wishes to marry me; Master Pangloss always
LINE 40: told me that all men are equal, and certainly I will marry her."
LINE 41: "We shall see that, thou scoundrel!" said the Jesuit Baron de
LINE 42: Thunder-ten-Tronckh, and that instant struck him across the face with
LINE 43: the flat of his sword. Candide in an instant drew his rapier, and
LINE 44: plunged it up to the hilt in the Jesuit's belly; but in pulling it out
LINE 45: reeking hot, he burst into tears.
LINE 46: "Good God!" said he, "I have killed my old master, my friend, my
LINE 47: brother-in-law! I am the best-natured creature in the world, and yet I
LINE 48: have already killed three men, and of these three two were priests."
LINE 49: Cacambo, who stood sentry by the door of the arbour, ran to him.
LINE 50: "We have nothing more for it than to sell our lives as dearly as we
LINE 51: can," said his master to him, "without doubt some one will soon enter
LINE 52: the arbour, and we must die sword in hand."
LINE 53: Cacambo, who had been in a great many scrapes in his lifetime, did not
LINE 54: lose his head; he took the Baron's Jesuit habit, put it on Candide, gave
LINE 55: him the square cap, and made him mount on horseback. All this was done
LINE 56: in the twinkling of an eye.
LINE 57: "Let us gallop fast, master, everybody will take you for a Jesuit, going
LINE 58: to give directions to your men, and we shall have passed the frontiers
LINE 59: before they will be able to overtake us."
LINE 60: He flew as he spoke these words, crying out aloud in Spanish:
LINE 61: "Make way, make way, for the reverend Father Colonel."