LINE 1: Candide and his valet had got beyond the barrier, before it was known in
LINE 2: the camp that the German Jesuit was dead. The wary Cacambo had taken
LINE 3: care to fill his wallet with bread, chocolate, bacon, fruit, and a few
LINE 4: bottles of wine. With their Andalusian horses they penetrated into an
LINE 5: unknown country, where they perceived no beaten track. At length they
LINE 6: came to a beautiful meadow intersected with purling rills. Here our two
LINE 7: adventurers fed their horses. Cacambo proposed to his master to take
LINE 8: some food, and he set him an example.
LINE 9: "How can you ask me to eat ham," said Candide, "after killing the
LINE 10: Baron's son, and being doomed never more to see the beautiful Cunegonde?
LINE 11: What will it avail me to spin out my wretched days and drag them far
LINE 12: from her in remorse and despair? And what will the _Journal of
LINE 13: Trevoux_[17] say?"
LINE 14: While he was thus lamenting his fate, he went on eating. The sun went
LINE 15: down. The two wanderers heard some little cries which seemed to be
LINE 16: uttered by women. They did not know whether they were cries of pain or
LINE 17: joy; but they started up precipitately with that inquietude and alarm
LINE 18: which every little thing inspires in an unknown country. The noise was
LINE 19: made by two naked girls, who tripped along the mead, while two monkeys
LINE 20: were pursuing them and biting their buttocks. Candide was moved with
LINE 21: pity; he had learned to fire a gun in the Bulgarian service, and he was
LINE 22: so clever at it, that he could hit a filbert in a hedge without touching
LINE 23: a leaf of the tree. He took up his double-barrelled Spanish fusil, let
LINE 24: it off, and killed the two monkeys.
LINE 25: "God be praised! My dear Cacambo, I have rescued those two poor
LINE 26: creatures from a most perilous situation. If I have committed a sin in
LINE 27: killing an Inquisitor and a Jesuit, I have made ample amends by saving
LINE 28: the lives of these girls. Perhaps they are young ladies of family; and
LINE 29: this adventure may procure us great advantages in this country."
LINE 30: He was continuing, but stopped short when he saw the two girls tenderly
LINE 31: embracing the monkeys, bathing their bodies in tears, and rending the
LINE 32: air with the most dismal lamentations.
LINE 33: "Little did I expect to see such good-nature," said he at length to
LINE 34: Cacambo; who made answer:
LINE 35: "Master, you have done a fine thing now; you have slain the sweethearts
LINE 36: of those two young ladies."
LINE 37: "The sweethearts! Is it possible? You are jesting, Cacambo, I can never
LINE 38: believe it!"
LINE 39: "Dear master," replied Cacambo; "you are surprised at everything. Why
LINE 40: should you think it so strange that in some countries there are monkeys
LINE 41: which insinuate themselves into the good graces of the ladies; they are
LINE 42: a fourth part human, as I am a fourth part Spaniard."
LINE 43: "Alas!" replied Candide, "I remember to have heard Master Pangloss say,
LINE 44: that formerly such accidents used to happen; that these mixtures were
LINE 45: productive of Centaurs, Fauns, and Satyrs; and that many of the ancients
LINE 46: had seen such monsters, but I looked upon the whole as fabulous."
LINE 47: "You ought now to be convinced," said Cacambo, "that it is the truth,
LINE 48: and you see what use is made of those creatures, by persons that have
LINE 49: not had a proper education; all I fear is that those ladies will play us
LINE 50: some ugly trick."
LINE 51: These sound reflections induced Candide to leave the meadow and to
LINE 52: plunge into a wood. He supped there with Cacambo; and after cursing the
LINE 53: Portuguese inquisitor, the Governor of Buenos Ayres, and the Baron, they
LINE 54: fell asleep on moss. On awaking they felt that they could not move; for
LINE 55: during the night the Oreillons, who inhabited that country, and to whom
LINE 56: the ladies had denounced them, had bound them with cords made of the
LINE 57: bark of trees. They were encompassed by fifty naked Oreillons, armed
LINE 58: with bows and arrows, with clubs and flint hatchets. Some were making a
LINE 59: large cauldron boil, others were preparing spits, and all cried:
LINE 60: "A Jesuit! a Jesuit! we shall be revenged, we shall have excellent
LINE 61: cheer, let us eat the Jesuit, let us eat him up!"
LINE 62: "I told you, my dear master," cried Cacambo sadly, "that those two girls
LINE 63: would play us some ugly trick."
LINE 64: Candide seeing the cauldron and the spits, cried:
LINE 65: "We are certainly going to be either roasted or boiled. Ah! what would
LINE 66: Master Pangloss say, were he to see how pure nature is formed?
LINE 67: Everything is right, may be, but I declare it is very hard to have lost
LINE 68: Miss Cunegonde and to be put upon a spit by Oreillons."
LINE 69: Cacambo never lost his head.
LINE 70: "Do not despair," said he to the disconsolate Candide, "I understand a
LINE 71: little of the jargon of these people, I will speak to them."
LINE 72: "Be sure," said Candide, "to represent to them how frightfully inhuman
LINE 73: it is to cook men, and how very un-Christian."
LINE 74: "Gentlemen," said Cacambo, "you reckon you are to-day going to feast
LINE 75: upon a Jesuit. It is all very well, nothing is more unjust than thus to
LINE 76: treat your enemies. Indeed, the law of nature teaches us to kill our
LINE 77: neighbour, and such is the practice all over the world. If we do not
LINE 78: accustom ourselves to eating them, it is because we have better fare.
LINE 79: But you have not the same resources as we; certainly it is much better
LINE 80: to devour your enemies than to resign to the crows and rooks the fruits
LINE 81: of your victory. But, gentlemen, surely you would not choose to eat your
LINE 82: friends. You believe that you are going to spit a Jesuit, and he is your
LINE 83: defender. It is the enemy of your enemies that you are going to roast.
LINE 84: As for myself, I was born in your country; this gentleman is my master,
LINE 85: and, far from being a Jesuit, he has just killed one, whose spoils he
LINE 86: wears; and thence comes your mistake. To convince you of the truth of
LINE 87: what I say, take his habit and carry it to the first barrier of the
LINE 88: Jesuit kingdom, and inform yourselves whether my master did not kill a
LINE 89: Jesuit officer. It will not take you long, and you can always eat us if
LINE 90: you find that I have lied to you. But I have told you the truth. You are
LINE 91: too well acquainted with the principles of public law, humanity, and
LINE 92: justice not to pardon us."
LINE 93: The Oreillons found this speech very reasonable. They deputed two of
LINE 94: their principal people with all expedition to inquire into the truth of
LINE 95: the matter; these executed their commission like men of sense, and soon
LINE 96: returned with good news. The Oreillons untied their prisoners, showed
LINE 97: them all sorts of civilities, offered them girls, gave them refreshment,
LINE 98: and reconducted them to the confines of their territories, proclaiming
LINE 99: with great joy:
LINE 100: "He is no Jesuit! He is no Jesuit!"
LINE 101: Candide could not help being surprised at the cause of his deliverance.
LINE 102: "What people!" said he; "what men! what manners! If I had not been so
LINE 103: lucky as to run Miss Cunegonde's brother through the body, I should have
LINE 104: been devoured without redemption. But, after all, pure nature is good,
LINE 105: since these people, instead of feasting upon my flesh, have shown me a
LINE 106: thousand civilities, when then I was not a Jesuit."