LINE 1: "You see," said Cacambo to Candide, as soon as they had reached the
LINE 2: frontiers of the Oreillons, "that this hemisphere is not better than the
LINE 3: others, take my word for it; let us go back to Europe by the shortest
LINE 4: way."
LINE 5: "How go back?" said Candide, "and where shall we go? to my own country?
LINE 6: The Bulgarians and the Abares are slaying all; to Portugal? there I
LINE 7: shall be burnt; and if we abide here we are every moment in danger of
LINE 8: being spitted. But how can I resolve to quit a part of the world where
LINE 9: my dear Cunegonde resides?"
LINE 10: "Let us turn towards Cayenne," said Cacambo, "there we shall find
LINE 11: Frenchmen, who wander all over the world; they may assist us; God will
LINE 12: perhaps have pity on us."
LINE 13: It was not easy to get to Cayenne; they knew vaguely in which direction
LINE 14: to go, but rivers, precipices, robbers, savages, obstructed them all the
LINE 15: way. Their horses died of fatigue. Their provisions were consumed; they
LINE 16: fed a whole month upon wild fruits, and found themselves at last near a
LINE 17: little river bordered with cocoa trees, which sustained their lives and
LINE 18: their hopes.
LINE 19: Cacambo, who was as good a counsellor as the old woman, said to Candide:
LINE 20: "We are able to hold out no longer; we have walked enough. I see an
LINE 21: empty canoe near the river-side; let us fill it with cocoanuts, throw
LINE 22: ourselves into it, and go with the current; a river always leads to some
LINE 23: inhabited spot. If we do not find pleasant things we shall at least find
LINE 24: new things."
LINE 25: "With all my heart," said Candide, "let us recommend ourselves to
LINE 26: Providence."
LINE 27: They rowed a few leagues, between banks, in some places flowery, in
LINE 28: others barren; in some parts smooth, in others rugged. The stream ever
LINE 29: widened, and at length lost itself under an arch of frightful rocks
LINE 30: which reached to the sky. The two travellers had the courage to commit
LINE 31: themselves to the current. The river, suddenly contracting at this
LINE 32: place, whirled them along with a dreadful noise and rapidity. At the end
LINE 33: of four-and-twenty hours they saw daylight again, but their canoe was
LINE 34: dashed to pieces against the rocks. For a league they had to creep from
LINE 35: rock to rock, until at length they discovered an extensive plain,
LINE 36: bounded by inaccessible mountains. The country was cultivated as much
LINE 37: for pleasure as for necessity. On all sides the useful was also the
LINE 38: beautiful. The roads were covered, or rather adorned, with carriages of
LINE 39: a glittering form and substance, in which were men and women of
LINE 40: surprising beauty, drawn by large red sheep which surpassed in fleetness
LINE 41: the finest coursers of Andalusia, Tetuan, and Mequinez.[18]
LINE 42: "Here, however, is a country," said Candide, "which is better than
LINE 43: Westphalia."
LINE 44: He stepped out with Cacambo towards the first village which he saw. Some
LINE 45: children dressed in tattered brocades played at quoits on the outskirts.
LINE 46: Our travellers from the other world amused themselves by looking on. The
LINE 47: quoits were large round pieces, yellow, red, and green, which cast a
LINE 48: singular lustre! The travellers picked a few of them off the ground;
LINE 49: this was of gold, that of emeralds, the other of rubies--the least of
LINE 50: them would have been the greatest ornament on the Mogul's throne.
LINE 51: "Without doubt," said Cacambo, "these children must be the king's sons
LINE 52: that are playing at quoits!"
LINE 53: The village schoolmaster appeared at this moment and called them to
LINE 54: school.
LINE 55: "There," said Candide, "is the preceptor of the royal family."
LINE 56: The little truants immediately quitted their game, leaving the quoits
LINE 57: on the ground with all their other playthings. Candide gathered them up,
LINE 58: ran to the master, and presented them to him in a most humble manner,
LINE 59: giving him to understand by signs that their royal highnesses had
LINE 60: forgotten their gold and jewels. The schoolmaster, smiling, flung them
LINE 61: upon the ground; then, looking at Candide with a good deal of surprise,
LINE 62: went about his business.
LINE 63: The travellers, however, took care to gather up the gold, the rubies,
LINE 64: and the emeralds.
LINE 65: "Where are we?" cried Candide. "The king's children in this country must
LINE 66: be well brought up, since they are taught to despise gold and precious
LINE 67: stones."
LINE 68: Cacambo was as much surprised as Candide. At length they drew near the
LINE 69: first house in the village. It was built like an European palace. A
LINE 70: crowd of people pressed about the door, and there were still more in the
LINE 71: house. They heard most agreeable music, and were aware of a delicious
LINE 72: odour of cooking. Cacambo went up to the door and heard they were
LINE 73: talking Peruvian; it was his mother tongue, for it is well known that
LINE 74: Cacambo was born in Tucuman, in a village where no other language was
LINE 75: spoken.
LINE 76: "I will be your interpreter here," said he to Candide; "let us go in, it
LINE 77: is a public-house."
LINE 78: Immediately two waiters and two girls, dressed in cloth of gold, and
LINE 79: their hair tied up with ribbons, invited them to sit down to table with
LINE 80: the landlord. They served four dishes of soup, each garnished with two
LINE 81: young parrots; a boiled condor[19] which weighed two hundred pounds; two
LINE 82: roasted monkeys, of excellent flavour; three hundred humming-birds in
LINE 83: one dish, and six hundred fly-birds in another; exquisite ragouts;
LINE 84: delicious pastries; the whole served up in dishes of a kind of
LINE 85: rock-crystal. The waiters and girls poured out several liqueurs drawn
LINE 86: from the sugar-cane.
LINE 87: Most of the company were chapmen and waggoners, all extremely polite;
LINE 88: they asked Cacambo a few questions with the greatest circumspection, and
LINE 89: answered his in the most obliging manner.
LINE 90: As soon as dinner was over, Cacambo believed as well as Candide that
LINE 91: they might well pay their reckoning by laying down two of those large
LINE 92: gold pieces which they had picked up. The landlord and landlady shouted
LINE 93: with laughter and held their sides. When the fit was over:
LINE 94: "Gentlemen," said the landlord, "it is plain you are strangers, and such
LINE 95: guests we are not accustomed to see; pardon us therefore for laughing
LINE 96: when you offered us the pebbles from our highroads in payment of your
LINE 97: reckoning. You doubtless have not the money of the country; but it is
LINE 98: not necessary to have any money at all to dine in this house. All
LINE 99: hostelries established for the convenience of commerce are paid by the
LINE 100: government. You have fared but very indifferently because this is a poor
LINE 101: village; but everywhere else, you will be received as you deserve."
LINE 102: Cacambo explained this whole discourse with great astonishment to
LINE 103: Candide, who was as greatly astonished to hear it.
LINE 104: "What sort of a country then is this," said they to one another; "a
LINE 105: country unknown to all the rest of the world, and where nature is of a
LINE 106: kind so different from ours? It is probably the country where all is
LINE 107: well; for there absolutely must be one such place. And, whatever Master
LINE 108: Pangloss might say, I often found that things went very ill in
LINE 109: Westphalia."