LINE 1: The old philosopher, whose name was Martin, embarked then with Candide
LINE 2: for Bordeaux. They had both seen and suffered a great deal; and if the
LINE 3: vessel had sailed from Surinam to Japan, by the Cape of Good Hope, the
LINE 4: subject of moral and natural evil would have enabled them to entertain
LINE 5: one another during the whole voyage.
LINE 6: Candide, however, had one great advantage over Martin, in that he always
LINE 7: hoped to see Miss Cunegonde; whereas Martin had nothing at all to hope.
LINE 8: Besides, Candide was possessed of money and jewels, and though he had
LINE 9: lost one hundred large red sheep, laden with the greatest treasure upon
LINE 10: earth; though the knavery of the Dutch skipper still sat heavy upon his
LINE 11: mind; yet when he reflected upon what he had still left, and when he
LINE 12: mentioned the name of Cunegonde, especially towards the latter end of a
LINE 13: repast, he inclined to Pangloss's doctrine.
LINE 14: "But you, Mr. Martin," said he to the philosopher, "what do you think
LINE 15: of all this? what are your ideas on moral and natural evil?"
LINE 16: "Sir," answered Martin, "our priests accused me of being a Socinian, but
LINE 17: the real fact is I am a Manichean."[21]
LINE 18: "You jest," said Candide; "there are no longer Manicheans in the world."
LINE 19: "I am one," said Martin. "I cannot help it; I know not how to think
LINE 20: otherwise."
LINE 21: "Surely you must be possessed by the devil," said Candide.
LINE 22: "He is so deeply concerned in the affairs of this world," answered
LINE 23: Martin, "that he may very well be in me, as well as in everybody else;
LINE 24: but I own to you that when I cast an eye on this globe, or rather on
LINE 25: this little ball, I cannot help thinking that God has abandoned it to
LINE 26: some malignant being. I except, always, El Dorado. I scarcely ever knew
LINE 27: a city that did not desire the destruction of a neighbouring city, nor a
LINE 28: family that did not wish to exterminate some other family. Everywhere
LINE 29: the weak execrate the powerful, before whom they cringe; and the
LINE 30: powerful beat them like sheep whose wool and flesh they sell. A million
LINE 31: regimented assassins, from one extremity of Europe to the other, get
LINE 32: their bread by disciplined depredation and murder, for want of more
LINE 33: honest employment. Even in those cities which seem to enjoy peace, and
LINE 34: where the arts flourish, the inhabitants are devoured by more envy,
LINE 35: care, and uneasiness than are experienced by a besieged town. Secret
LINE 36: griefs are more cruel than public calamities. In a word I have seen so
LINE 37: much, and experienced so much that I am a Manichean."
LINE 38: "There are, however, some things good," said Candide.
LINE 39: "That may be," said Martin; "but I know them not."
LINE 40: In the middle of this dispute they heard the report of cannon; it
LINE 41: redoubled every instant. Each took out his glass. They saw two ships in
LINE 42: close fight about three miles off. The wind brought both so near to the
LINE 43: French vessel that our travellers had the pleasure of seeing the fight
LINE 44: at their ease. At length one let off a broadside, so low and so truly
LINE 45: aimed, that the other sank to the bottom. Candide and Martin could
LINE 46: plainly perceive a hundred men on the deck of the sinking vessel; they
LINE 47: raised their hands to heaven and uttered terrible outcries, and the next
LINE 48: moment were swallowed up by the sea.
LINE 49: "Well," said Martin, "this is how men treat one another."
LINE 50: "It is true," said Candide; "there is something diabolical in this
LINE 51: affair."
LINE 52: While speaking, he saw he knew not what, of a shining red, swimming
LINE 53: close to the vessel. They put out the long-boat to see what it could
LINE 54: be: it was one of his sheep! Candide was more rejoiced at the recovery
LINE 55: of this one sheep than he had been grieved at the loss of the hundred
LINE 56: laden with the large diamonds of El Dorado.
LINE 57: The French captain soon saw that the captain of the victorious vessel
LINE 58: was a Spaniard, and that the other was a Dutch pirate, and the very same
LINE 59: one who had robbed Candide. The immense plunder which this villain had
LINE 60: amassed, was buried with him in the sea, and out of the whole only one
LINE 61: sheep was saved.
LINE 62: "You see," said Candide to Martin, "that crime is sometimes punished.
LINE 63: This rogue of a Dutch skipper has met with the fate he deserved."
LINE 64: "Yes," said Martin; "but why should the passengers be doomed also to
LINE 65: destruction? God has punished the knave, and the devil has drowned the
LINE 66: rest."
LINE 67: The French and Spanish ships continued their course, and Candide
LINE 68: continued his conversation with Martin. They disputed fifteen successive
LINE 69: days, and on the last of those fifteen days, they were as far advanced
LINE 70: as on the first. But, however, they chatted, they communicated ideas,
LINE 71: they consoled each other. Candide caressed his sheep.
LINE 72: "Since I have found thee again," said he, "I may likewise chance to find
LINE 73: my Cunegonde."