LINE 1: At length they descried the coast of France.
LINE 2: "Were you ever in France, Mr. Martin?" said Candide.
LINE 3: "Yes," said Martin, "I have been in several provinces. In some one-half
LINE 4: of the people are fools, in others they are too cunning; in some they
LINE 5: are weak and simple, in others they affect to be witty; in all, the
LINE 6: principal occupation is love, the next is slander, and the third is
LINE 7: talking nonsense."
LINE 8: "But, Mr. Martin, have you seen Paris?"
LINE 9: "Yes, I have. All these kinds are found there. It is a chaos--a confused
LINE 10: multitude, where everybody seeks pleasure and scarcely any one finds it,
LINE 11: at least as it appeared to me. I made a short stay there. On my arrival
LINE 12: I was robbed of all I had by pickpockets at the fair of St. Germain. I
LINE 13: myself was taken for a robber and was imprisoned for eight days, after
LINE 14: which I served as corrector of the press to gain the money necessary for
LINE 15: my return to Holland on foot. I knew the whole scribbling rabble, the
LINE 16: party rabble, the fanatic rabble. It is said that there are very polite
LINE 17: people in that city, and I wish to believe it."
LINE 18: "For my part, I have no curiosity to see France," said Candide. "You may
LINE 19: easily imagine that after spending a month at El Dorado I can desire to
LINE 20: behold nothing upon earth but Miss Cunegonde. I go to await her at
LINE 21: Venice. We shall pass through France on our way to Italy. Will you bear
LINE 22: me company?"
LINE 23: "With all my heart," said Martin. "It is said that Venice is fit only
LINE 24: for its own nobility, but that strangers meet with a very good reception
LINE 25: if they have a good deal of money. I have none of it; you have,
LINE 26: therefore I will follow you all over the world."
LINE 27: "But do you believe," said Candide, "that the earth was originally a
LINE 28: sea, as we find it asserted in that large book belonging to the
LINE 29: captain?"
LINE 30: "I do not believe a word of it," said Martin, "any more than I do of the
LINE 31: many ravings which have been published lately."
LINE 32: "But for what end, then, has this world been formed?" said Candide.
LINE 33: "To plague us to death," answered Martin.
LINE 34: "Are you not greatly surprised," continued Candide, "at the love which
LINE 35: these two girls of the Oreillons had for those monkeys, of which I have
LINE 36: already told you?"
LINE 37: "Not at all," said Martin. "I do not see that that passion was strange.
LINE 38: I have seen so many extraordinary things that I have ceased to be
LINE 39: surprised."
LINE 40: "Do you believe," said Candide, "that men have always massacred each
LINE 41: other as they do to-day, that they have always been liars, cheats,
LINE 42: traitors, ingrates, brigands, idiots, thieves, scoundrels, gluttons,
LINE 43: drunkards, misers, envious, ambitious, bloody-minded, calumniators,
LINE 44: debauchees, fanatics, hypocrites, and fools?"
LINE 45: "Do you believe," said Martin, "that hawks have always eaten pigeons
LINE 46: when they have found them?"
LINE 47: "Yes, without doubt," said Candide.
LINE 48: "Well, then," said Martin, "if hawks have always had the same character
LINE 49: why should you imagine that men may have changed theirs?"
LINE 50: "Oh!" said Candide, "there is a vast deal of difference, for free
LINE 51: will----"
LINE 52: And reasoning thus they arrived at Bordeaux.