LINE 1: Upon their arrival at Venice, Candide went to search for Cacambo at
LINE 2: every inn and coffee-house, and among all the ladies of pleasure, but to
LINE 3: no purpose. He sent every day to inquire on all the ships that came in.
LINE 4: But there was no news of Cacambo.
LINE 5: "What!" said he to Martin, "I have had time to voyage from Surinam to
LINE 6: Bordeaux, to go from Bordeaux to Paris, from Paris to Dieppe, from
LINE 7: Dieppe to Portsmouth, to coast along Portugal and Spain, to cross the
LINE 8: whole Mediterranean, to spend some months, and yet the beautiful
LINE 9: Cunegonde has not arrived! Instead of her I have only met a Parisian
LINE 10: wench and a Perigordian Abbé. Cunegonde is dead without doubt, and there
LINE 11: is nothing for me but to die. Alas! how much better it would have been
LINE 12: for me to have remained in the paradise of El Dorado than to come back
LINE 13: to this cursed Europe! You are in the right, my dear Martin: all is
LINE 14: misery and illusion."
LINE 15: He fell into a deep melancholy, and neither went to see the opera, nor
LINE 16: any of the other diversions of the Carnival; nay, he was proof against
LINE 17: the temptations of all the ladies.
LINE 18: "You are in truth very simple," said Martin to him, "if you imagine that
LINE 19: a mongrel valet, who has five or six millions in his pocket, will go to
LINE 20: the other end of the world to seek your mistress and bring her to you to
LINE 21: Venice. If he find her, he will keep her to himself; if he do not find
LINE 22: her he will get another. I advise you to forget your valet Cacambo and
LINE 23: your mistress Cunegonde."
LINE 24: Martin was not consoling. Candide's melancholy increased; and Martin
LINE 25: continued to prove to him that there was very little virtue or happiness
LINE 26: upon earth, except perhaps in El Dorado, where nobody could gain
LINE 27: admittance.
LINE 28: While they were disputing on this important subject and waiting for
LINE 29: Cunegonde, Candide saw a young Theatin friar in St. Mark's Piazza,
LINE 30: holding a girl on his arm. The Theatin looked fresh coloured, plump, and
LINE 31: vigorous; his eyes were sparkling, his air assured, his look lofty, and
LINE 32: his step bold. The girl was very pretty, and sang; she looked amorously
LINE 33: at her Theatin, and from time to time pinched his fat cheeks.
LINE 34: "At least you will allow me," said Candide to Martin, "that these two
LINE 35: are happy. Hitherto I have met with none but unfortunate people in the
LINE 36: whole habitable globe, except in El Dorado; but as to this pair, I would
LINE 37: venture to lay a wager that they are very happy."
LINE 38: "I lay you they are not," said Martin.
LINE 39: "We need only ask them to dine with us," said Candide, "and you will see
LINE 40: whether I am mistaken."
LINE 41: Immediately he accosted them, presented his compliments, and invited
LINE 42: them to his inn to eat some macaroni, with Lombard partridges, and
LINE 43: caviare, and to drink some Montepulciano, Lachrymæ Christi, Cyprus and
LINE 44: Samos wine. The girl blushed, the Theatin accepted the invitation and
LINE 45: she followed him, casting her eyes on Candide with confusion and
LINE 46: surprise, and dropping a few tears. No sooner had she set foot in
LINE 47: Candide's apartment than she cried out:
LINE 48: "Ah! Mr. Candide does not know Paquette again."
LINE 49: Candide had not viewed her as yet with attention, his thoughts being
LINE 50: entirely taken up with Cunegonde; but recollecting her as she spoke.
LINE 51: "Alas!" said he, "my poor child, it is you who reduced Doctor Pangloss
LINE 52: to the beautiful condition in which I saw him?"
LINE 53: "Alas! it was I, sir, indeed," answered Paquette. "I see that you have
LINE 54: heard all. I have been informed of the frightful disasters that befell
LINE 55: the family of my lady Baroness, and the fair Cunegonde. I swear to you
LINE 56: that my fate has been scarcely less sad. I was very innocent when you
LINE 57: knew me. A Grey Friar, who was my confessor, easily seduced me. The
LINE 58: consequences were terrible. I was obliged to quit the castle some time
LINE 59: after the Baron had sent you away with kicks on the backside. If a
LINE 60: famous surgeon had not taken compassion on me, I should have died. For
LINE 61: some time I was this surgeon's mistress, merely out of gratitude. His
LINE 62: wife, who was mad with jealousy, beat me every day unmercifully; she was
LINE 63: a fury. The surgeon was one of the ugliest of men, and I the most
LINE 64: wretched of women, to be continually beaten for a man I did not love.
LINE 65: You know, sir, what a dangerous thing it is for an ill-natured woman to
LINE 66: be married to a doctor. Incensed at the behaviour of his wife, he one
LINE 67: day gave her so effectual a remedy to cure her of a slight cold, that
LINE 68: she died two hours after, in most horrid convulsions. The wife's
LINE 69: relations prosecuted the husband; he took flight, and I was thrown into
LINE 70: jail. My innocence would not have saved me if I had not been
LINE 71: good-looking. The judge set me free, on condition that he succeeded the
LINE 72: surgeon. I was soon supplanted by a rival, turned out of doors quite
LINE 73: destitute, and obliged to continue this abominable trade, which appears
LINE 74: so pleasant to you men, while to us women it is the utmost abyss of
LINE 75: misery. I have come to exercise the profession at Venice. Ah! sir, if
LINE 76: you could only imagine what it is to be obliged to caress indifferently
LINE 77: an old merchant, a lawyer, a monk, a gondolier, an abbé, to be exposed
LINE 78: to abuse and insults; to be often reduced to borrowing a petticoat, only
LINE 79: to go and have it raised by a disagreeable man; to be robbed by one of
LINE 80: what one has earned from another; to be subject to the extortions of the
LINE 81: officers of justice; and to have in prospect only a frightful old age, a
LINE 82: hospital, and a dung-hill; you would conclude that I am one of the most
LINE 83: unhappy creatures in the world."[33]
LINE 84: Paquette thus opened her heart to honest Candide, in the presence of
LINE 85: Martin, who said to his friend:
LINE 86: "You see that already I have won half the wager."
LINE 87: Friar Giroflée stayed in the dining-room, and drank a glass or two of
LINE 88: wine while he was waiting for dinner.
LINE 89: "But," said Candide to Paquette, "you looked so gay and content when I
LINE 90: met you; you sang and you behaved so lovingly to the Theatin, that you
LINE 91: seemed to me as happy as you pretend to be now the reverse."
LINE 92: "Ah! sir," answered Paquette, "this is one of the miseries of the trade.
LINE 93: Yesterday I was robbed and beaten by an officer; yet to-day I must put
LINE 94: on good humour to please a friar."
LINE 95: Candide wanted no more convincing; he owned that Martin was in the
LINE 96: right. They sat down to table with Paquette and the Theatin; the repast
LINE 97: was entertaining; and towards the end they conversed with all
LINE 98: confidence.
LINE 99: "Father," said Candide to the Friar, "you appear to me to enjoy a state
LINE 100: that all the world might envy; the flower of health shines in your face,
LINE 101: your expression makes plain your happiness; you have a very pretty girl
LINE 102: for your recreation, and you seem well satisfied with your state as a
LINE 103: Theatin."
LINE 104: "My faith, sir," said Friar Giroflée, "I wish that all the Theatins were
LINE 105: at the bottom of the sea. I have been tempted a hundred times to set
LINE 106: fire to the convent, and go and become a Turk. My parents forced me at
LINE 107: the age of fifteen to put on this detestable habit, to increase the
LINE 108: fortune of a cursed elder brother, whom God confound. Jealousy, discord,
LINE 109: and fury, dwell in the convent. It is true I have preached a few bad
LINE 110: sermons that have brought me in a little money, of which the prior stole
LINE 111: half, while the rest serves to maintain my girls; but when I return at
LINE 112: night to the monastery, I am ready to dash my head against the walls of
LINE 113: the dormitory; and all my fellows are in the same case."
LINE 114: Martin turned towards Candide with his usual coolness.
LINE 115: "Well," said he, "have I not won the whole wager?"
LINE 116: Candide gave two thousand piastres to Paquette, and one thousand to
LINE 117: Friar Giroflée.
LINE 118: "I'll answer for it," said he, "that with this they will be happy."
LINE 119: "I do not believe it at all," said Martin; "you will, perhaps, with
LINE 120: these piastres only render them the more unhappy."
LINE 121: "Let that be as it may," said Candide, "but one thing consoles me. I see
LINE 122: that we often meet with those whom we expected never to see more; so
LINE 123: that, perhaps, as I have found my red sheep and Paquette, it may well be
LINE 124: that I shall also find Cunegonde."
LINE 125: "I wish," said Martin, "she may one day make you very happy; but I doubt
LINE 126: it very much."
LINE 127: "You are very hard of belief," said Candide.
LINE 128: "I have lived," said Martin.
LINE 129: "You see those gondoliers," said Candide, "are they not perpetually
LINE 130: singing?"
LINE 131: "You do not see them," said Martin, "at home with their wives and brats.
LINE 132: The Doge has his troubles, the gondoliers have theirs. It is true that,
LINE 133: all things considered, the life of a gondolier is preferable to that of
LINE 134: a Doge; but I believe the difference to be so trifling that it is not
LINE 135: worth the trouble of examining."
LINE 136: "People talk," said Candide, "of the Senator Pococurante, who lives in
LINE 137: that fine palace on the Brenta, where he entertains foreigners in the
LINE 138: politest manner. They pretend that this man has never felt any
LINE 139: uneasiness."
LINE 140: "I should be glad to see such a rarity," said Martin.
LINE 141: Candide immediately sent to ask the Lord Pococurante permission to wait
LINE 142: upon him the next day.