LINE 1: While Candide, the Baron, Pangloss, Martin, and Cacambo were relating
LINE 2: their several adventures, were reasoning on the contingent or
LINE 3: non-contingent events of the universe, disputing on effects and causes,
LINE 4: on moral and physical evil, on liberty and necessity, and on the
LINE 5: consolations a slave may feel even on a Turkish galley, they arrived at
LINE 6: the house of the Transylvanian prince on the banks of the Propontis. The
LINE 7: first objects which met their sight were Cunegonde and the old woman
LINE 8: hanging towels out to dry.
LINE 9: The Baron paled at this sight. The tender, loving Candide, seeing his
LINE 10: beautiful Cunegonde embrowned, with blood-shot eyes, withered neck,
LINE 11: wrinkled cheeks, and rough, red arms, recoiled three paces, seized with
LINE 12: horror, and then advanced out of good manners. She embraced Candide and
LINE 13: her brother; they embraced the old woman, and Candide ransomed them
LINE 14: both.
LINE 15: There was a small farm in the neighbourhood which the old woman
LINE 16: proposed to Candide to make a shift with till the company could be
LINE 17: provided for in a better manner. Cunegonde did not know she had grown
LINE 18: ugly, for nobody had told her of it; and she reminded Candide of his
LINE 19: promise in so positive a tone that the good man durst not refuse her. He
LINE 20: therefore intimated to the Baron that he intended marrying his sister.
LINE 21: "I will not suffer," said the Baron, "such meanness on her part, and
LINE 22: such insolence on yours; I will never be reproached with this scandalous
LINE 23: thing; my sister's children would never be able to enter the church in
LINE 24: Germany. No; my sister shall only marry a baron of the empire."
LINE 25: Cunegonde flung herself at his feet, and bathed them with her tears;
LINE 26: still he was inflexible.
LINE 27: "Thou foolish fellow," said Candide; "I have delivered thee out of the
LINE 28: galleys, I have paid thy ransom, and thy sister's also; she was a
LINE 29: scullion, and is very ugly, yet I am so condescending as to marry her;
LINE 30: and dost thou pretend to oppose the match? I should kill thee again,
LINE 31: were I only to consult my anger."
LINE 32: "Thou mayest kill me again," said the Baron, "but thou shalt not marry
LINE 33: my sister, at least whilst I am living."