LINE 1: The faithful Cacambo had already prevailed upon the Turkish skipper, who
LINE 2: was to conduct the Sultan Achmet to Constantinople, to receive Candide
LINE 3: and Martin on his ship. They both embarked after having made their
LINE 4: obeisance to his miserable Highness.
LINE 5: "You see," said Candide to Martin on the way, "we supped with six
LINE 6: dethroned kings, and of those six there was one to whom I gave charity.
LINE 7: Perhaps there are many other princes yet more unfortunate. For my part,
LINE 8: I have only lost a hundred sheep; and now I am flying into Cunegonde's
LINE 9: arms. My dear Martin, yet once more Pangloss was right: all is for the
LINE 10: best."
LINE 11: "I wish it," answered Martin.
LINE 12: "But," said Candide, "it was a very strange adventure we met with at
LINE 13: Venice. It has never before been seen or heard that six dethroned kings
LINE 14: have supped together at a public inn."
LINE 15: "It is not more extraordinary," said Martin, "than most of the things
LINE 16: that have happened to us. It is a very common thing for kings to be
LINE 17: dethroned; and as for the honour we have had of supping in their
LINE 18: company, it is a trifle not worth our attention."
LINE 19: No sooner had Candide got on board the vessel than he flew to his old
LINE 20: valet and friend Cacambo, and tenderly embraced him.
LINE 21: "Well," said he, "what news of Cunegonde? Is she still a prodigy of
LINE 22: beauty? Does she love me still? How is she? Thou hast doubtless bought
LINE 23: her a palace at Constantinople?"
LINE 24: "My dear master," answered Cacambo, "Cunegonde washes dishes on the
LINE 25: banks of the Propontis, in the service of a prince, who has very few
LINE 26: dishes to wash; she is a slave in the family of an ancient sovereign
LINE 27: named Ragotsky,[35] to whom the Grand Turk allows three crowns a day in
LINE 28: his exile. But what is worse still is, that she has lost her beauty and
LINE 29: has become horribly ugly."
LINE 30: "Well, handsome or ugly," replied Candide, "I am a man of honour, and it
LINE 31: is my duty to love her still. But how came she to be reduced to so
LINE 32: abject a state with the five or six millions that you took to her?"
LINE 33: "Ah!" said Cacambo, "was I not to give two millions to Senor Don
LINE 34: Fernando d'Ibaraa, y Figueora, y Mascarenes, y Lampourdos, y Souza,
LINE 35: Governor of Buenos Ayres, for permitting Miss Cunegonde to come away?
LINE 36: And did not a corsair bravely rob us of all the rest? Did not this
LINE 37: corsair carry us to Cape Matapan, to Milo, to Nicaria, to Samos, to
LINE 38: Petra, to the Dardanelles, to Marmora, to Scutari? Cunegonde and the old
LINE 39: woman serve the prince I now mentioned to you, and I am slave to the
LINE 40: dethroned Sultan."
LINE 41: "What a series of shocking calamities!" cried Candide. "But after all, I
LINE 42: have some diamonds left; and I may easily pay Cunegonde's ransom. Yet it
LINE 43: is a pity that she is grown so ugly."
LINE 44: Then, turning towards Martin: "Who do you think," said he, "is most to
LINE 45: be pitied--the Sultan Achmet, the Emperor Ivan, King Charles Edward, or
LINE 46: I?"
LINE 47: "How should I know!" answered Martin. "I must see into your hearts to be
LINE 48: able to tell."
LINE 49: "Ah!" said Candide, "if Pangloss were here, he could tell."
LINE 50: "I know not," said Martin, "in what sort of scales your Pangloss would
LINE 51: weigh the misfortunes of mankind and set a just estimate on their
LINE 52: sorrows. All that I can presume to say is, that there are millions of
LINE 53: people upon earth who have a hundred times more to complain of than King
LINE 54: Charles Edward, the Emperor Ivan, or the Sultan Achmet."
LINE 55: "That may well be," said Candide.
LINE 56: In a few days they reached the Bosphorus, and Candide began by paying a
LINE 57: very high ransom for Cacambo. Then without losing time, he and his
LINE 58: companions went on board a galley, in order to search on the banks of
LINE 59: the Propontis for his Cunegonde, however ugly she might have become.
LINE 60: Among the crew there were two slaves who rowed very badly, and to whose
LINE 61: bare shoulders the Levantine captain would now and then apply blows from
LINE 62: a bull's pizzle. Candide, from a natural impulse, looked at these two
LINE 63: slaves more attentively than at the other oarsmen, and approached them
LINE 64: with pity. Their features though greatly disfigured, had a slight
LINE 65: resemblance to those of Pangloss and the unhappy Jesuit and Westphalian
LINE 66: Baron, brother to Miss Cunegonde. This moved and saddened him. He looked
LINE 67: at them still more attentively.
LINE 68: "Indeed," said he to Cacambo, "if I had not seen Master Pangloss hanged,
LINE 69: and if I had not had the misfortune to kill the Baron, I should think it
LINE 70: was they that were rowing."
LINE 71: At the names of the Baron and of Pangloss, the two galley-slaves uttered
LINE 72: a loud cry, held fast by the seat, and let drop their oars. The captain
LINE 73: ran up to them and redoubled his blows with the bull's pizzle.
LINE 74: "Stop! stop! sir," cried Candide. "I will give you what money you
LINE 75: please."
LINE 76: "What! it is Candide!" said one of the slaves.
LINE 77: "What! it is Candide!" said the other.
LINE 78: "Do I dream?" cried Candide; "am I awake? or am I on board a galley? Is
LINE 79: this the Baron whom I killed? Is this Master Pangloss whom I saw
LINE 80: hanged?"
LINE 81: "It is we! it is we!" answered they.
LINE 82: "Well! is this the great philosopher?" said Martin.
LINE 83: "Ah! captain," said Candide, "what ransom will you take for Monsieur de
LINE 84: Thunder-ten-Tronckh, one of the first barons of the empire, and for
LINE 85: Monsieur Pangloss, the profoundest metaphysician in Germany?"
LINE 86: "Dog of a Christian," answered the Levantine captain, "since these two
LINE 87: dogs of Christian slaves are barons and metaphysicians, which I doubt
LINE 88: not are high dignities in their country, you shall give me fifty
LINE 89: thousand sequins."
LINE 90: "You shall have them, sir. Carry me back at once to Constantinople, and
LINE 91: you shall receive the money directly. But no; carry me first to Miss
LINE 92: Cunegonde."
LINE 93: Upon the first proposal made by Candide, however, the Levantine captain
LINE 94: had already tacked about, and made the crew ply their oars quicker than
LINE 95: a bird cleaves the air.
LINE 96: Candide embraced the Baron and Pangloss a hundred times.
LINE 97: "And how happened it, my dear Baron, that I did not kill you? And, my
LINE 98: dear Pangloss, how came you to life again after being hanged? And why
LINE 99: are you both in a Turkish galley?"
LINE 100: "And it is true that my dear sister is in this country?" said the Baron.
LINE 101: "Yes," answered Cacambo.
LINE 102: "Then I behold, once more, my dear Candide," cried Pangloss.
LINE 103: Candide presented Martin and Cacambo to them; they embraced each other,
LINE 104: and all spoke at once. The galley flew; they were already in the port.
LINE 105: Instantly Candide sent for a Jew, to whom he sold for fifty thousand
LINE 106: sequins a diamond worth a hundred thousand, though the fellow swore to
LINE 107: him by Abraham that he could give him no more. He immediately paid the
LINE 108: ransom for the Baron and Pangloss. The latter threw himself at the feet
LINE 109: of his deliverer, and bathed them with his tears; the former thanked him
LINE 110: with a nod, and promised to return him the money on the first
LINE 111: opportunity.
LINE 112: "But is it indeed possible that my sister can be in Turkey?" said he.
LINE 113: "Nothing is more possible," said Cacambo, "since she scours the dishes
LINE 114: in the service of a Transylvanian prince."
LINE 115: Candide sent directly for two Jews and sold them some more diamonds, and
LINE 116: then they all set out together in another galley to deliver Cunegonde
LINE 117: from slavery.