LINE 1: At the bottom of his heart Candide had no wish to marry Cunegonde. But
LINE 2: the extreme impertinence of the Baron determined him to conclude the
LINE 3: match, and Cunegonde pressed him so strongly that he could not go from
LINE 4: his word. He consulted Pangloss, Martin, and the faithful Cacambo.
LINE 5: Pangloss drew up an excellent memorial, wherein he proved that the Baron
LINE 6: had no right over his sister, and that according to all the laws of the
LINE 7: empire, she might marry Candide with her left hand. Martin was for
LINE 8: throwing the Baron into the sea; Cacambo decided that it would be better
LINE 9: to deliver him up again to the captain of the galley, after which they
LINE 10: thought to send him back to the General Father of the Order at Rome by
LINE 11: the first ship. This advice was well received, the old woman approved
LINE 12: it; they said not a word to his sister; the thing was executed for a
LINE 13: little money, and they had the double pleasure of entrapping a Jesuit,
LINE 14: and punishing the pride of a German baron.
LINE 15: It is natural to imagine that after so many disasters Candide married,
LINE 16: and living with the philosopher Pangloss, the philosopher Martin, the
LINE 17: prudent Cacambo, and the old woman, having besides brought so many
LINE 18: diamonds from the country of the ancient Incas, must have led a very
LINE 19: happy life. But he was so much imposed upon by the Jews that he had
LINE 20: nothing left except his small farm; his wife became uglier every day,
LINE 21: more peevish and unsupportable; the old woman was infirm and even more
LINE 22: fretful than Cunegonde. Cacambo, who worked in the garden, and took
LINE 23: vegetables for sale to Constantinople, was fatigued with hard work, and
LINE 24: cursed his destiny. Pangloss was in despair at not shining in some
LINE 25: German university. For Martin, he was firmly persuaded that he would be
LINE 26: as badly off elsewhere, and therefore bore things patiently. Candide,
LINE 27: Martin, and Pangloss sometimes disputed about morals and metaphysics.
LINE 28: They often saw passing under the windows of their farm boats full of
LINE 29: Effendis, Pashas, and Cadis, who were going into banishment to Lemnos,
LINE 30: Mitylene, or Erzeroum. And they saw other Cadis, Pashas, and Effendis
LINE 31: coming to supply the place of the exiles, and afterwards exiled in their
LINE 32: turn. They saw heads decently impaled for presentation to the Sublime
LINE 33: Porte. Such spectacles as these increased the number of their
LINE 34: dissertations; and when they did not dispute time hung so heavily upon
LINE 35: their hands, that one day the old woman ventured to say to them:
LINE 36: "I want to know which is worse, to be ravished a hundred times by negro
LINE 37: pirates, to have a buttock cut off, to run the gauntlet among the
LINE 38: Bulgarians, to be whipped and hanged at an _auto-da-fé_, to be
LINE 39: dissected, to row in the galleys--in short, to go through all the
LINE 40: miseries we have undergone, or to stay here and have nothing to do?"
LINE 41: "It is a great question," said Candide.
LINE 42: This discourse gave rise to new reflections, and Martin especially
LINE 43: concluded that man was born to live either in a state of distracting
LINE 44: inquietude or of lethargic disgust. Candide did not quite agree to that,
LINE 45: but he affirmed nothing. Pangloss owned that he had always suffered
LINE 46: horribly, but as he had once asserted that everything went wonderfully
LINE 47: well, he asserted it still, though he no longer believed it.
LINE 48: What helped to confirm Martin in his detestable principles, to stagger
LINE 49: Candide more than ever, and to puzzle Pangloss, was that one day they
LINE 50: saw Paquette and Friar Giroflée land at the farm in extreme misery. They
LINE 51: had soon squandered their three thousand piastres, parted, were
LINE 52: reconciled, quarrelled again, were thrown into gaol, had escaped, and
LINE 53: Friar Giroflée had at length become Turk. Paquette continued her trade
LINE 54: wherever she went, but made nothing of it.
LINE 55: "I foresaw," said Martin to Candide, "that your presents would soon be
LINE 56: dissipated, and only make them the more miserable. You have rolled in
LINE 57: millions of money, you and Cacambo; and yet you are not happier than
LINE 58: Friar Giroflée and Paquette."
LINE 59: "Ha!" said Pangloss to Paquette, "Providence has then brought you
LINE 60: amongst us again, my poor child! Do you know that you cost me the tip of
LINE 61: my nose, an eye, and an ear, as you may see? What a world is this!"
LINE 62: And now this new adventure set them philosophising more than ever.
LINE 63: In the neighbourhood there lived a very famous Dervish who was esteemed
LINE 64: the best philosopher in all Turkey, and they went to consult him.
LINE 65: Pangloss was the speaker.
LINE 66: "Master," said he, "we come to beg you to tell why so strange an animal
LINE 67: as man was made."
LINE 68: "With what meddlest thou?" said the Dervish; "is it thy business?"
LINE 69: "But, reverend father," said Candide, "there is horrible evil in this
LINE 70: world."
LINE 71: "What signifies it," said the Dervish, "whether there be evil or good?
LINE 72: When his highness sends a ship to Egypt, does he trouble his head
LINE 73: whether the mice on board are at their ease or not?"
LINE 74: "What, then, must we do?" said Pangloss.
LINE 75: "Hold your tongue," answered the Dervish.
LINE 76: "I was in hopes," said Pangloss, "that I should reason with you a little
LINE 77: about causes and effects, about the best of possible worlds, the origin
LINE 78: of evil, the nature of the soul, and the pre-established harmony."
LINE 79: At these words, the Dervish shut the door in their faces.
LINE 80: During this conversation, the news was spread that two Viziers and the
LINE 81: Mufti had been strangled at Constantinople, and that several of their
LINE 82: friends had been impaled. This catastrophe made a great noise for some
LINE 83: hours. Pangloss, Candide, and Martin, returning to the little farm, saw
LINE 84: a good old man taking the fresh air at his door under an orange bower.
LINE 85: Pangloss, who was as inquisitive as he was argumentative, asked the old
LINE 86: man what was the name of the strangled Mufti.
LINE 87: "I do not know," answered the worthy man, "and I have not known the name
LINE 88: of any Mufti, nor of any Vizier. I am entirely ignorant of the event you
LINE 89: mention; I presume in general that they who meddle with the
LINE 90: administration of public affairs die sometimes miserably, and that they
LINE 91: deserve it; but I never trouble my head about what is transacting at
LINE 92: Constantinople; I content myself with sending there for sale the fruits
LINE 93: of the garden which I cultivate."
LINE 94: Having said these words, he invited the strangers into his house; his
LINE 95: two sons and two daughters presented them with several sorts of sherbet,
LINE 96: which they made themselves, with Kaimak enriched with the candied-peel
LINE 97: of citrons, with oranges, lemons, pine-apples, pistachio-nuts, and Mocha
LINE 98: coffee unadulterated with the bad coffee of Batavia or the American
LINE 99: islands. After which the two daughters of the honest Mussulman perfumed
LINE 100: the strangers' beards.
LINE 101: "You must have a vast and magnificent estate," said Candide to the Turk.
LINE 102: "I have only twenty acres," replied the old man; "I and my children
LINE 103: cultivate them; our labour preserves us from three great
LINE 104: evils--weariness, vice, and want."
LINE 105: Candide, on his way home, made profound reflections on the old man's
LINE 106: conversation.
LINE 107: "This honest Turk," said he to Pangloss and Martin, "seems to be in a
LINE 108: situation far preferable to that of the six kings with whom we had the
LINE 109: honour of supping."
LINE 110: "Grandeur," said Pangloss, "is extremely dangerous according to the
LINE 111: testimony of philosophers. For, in short, Eglon, King of Moab, was
LINE 112: assassinated by Ehud; Absalom was hung by his hair, and pierced with
LINE 113: three darts; King Nadab, the son of Jeroboam, was killed by Baasa; King
LINE 114: Ela by Zimri; Ahaziah by Jehu; Athaliah by Jehoiada; the Kings
LINE 115: Jehoiakim, Jeconiah, and Zedekiah, were led into captivity. You know how
LINE 116: perished Croesus, Astyages, Darius, Dionysius of Syracuse, Pyrrhus,
LINE 117: Perseus, Hannibal, Jugurtha, Ariovistus, Cæsar, Pompey, Nero, Otho,
LINE 118: Vitellius, Domitian, Richard II. of England, Edward II., Henry VI.,
LINE 119: Richard III., Mary Stuart, Charles I., the three Henrys of France, the
LINE 120: Emperor Henry IV.! You know----"
LINE 121: "I know also," said Candide, "that we must cultivate our garden."
LINE 122: "You are right," said Pangloss, "for when man was first placed in the
LINE 123: Garden of Eden, he was put there _ut operaretur eum_, that he might
LINE 124: cultivate it; which shows that man was not born to be idle."
LINE 125: "Let us work," said Martin, "without disputing; it is the only way to
LINE 126: render life tolerable."
LINE 127: The whole little society entered into this laudable design, according to
LINE 128: their different abilities. Their little plot of land produced plentiful
LINE 129: crops. Cunegonde was, indeed, very ugly, but she became an excellent
LINE 130: pastry cook; Paquette worked at embroidery; the old woman looked after
LINE 131: the linen. They were all, not excepting Friar Giroflée, of some service
LINE 132: or other; for he made a good joiner, and became a very honest man.
LINE 133: Pangloss sometimes said to Candide:
LINE 134: "There is a concatenation of events in this best of all possible worlds:
LINE 135: for if you had not been kicked out of a magnificent castle for love of
LINE 136: Miss Cunegonde: if you had not been put into the Inquisition: if you had
LINE 137: not walked over America: if you had not stabbed the Baron: if you had
LINE 138: not lost all your sheep from the fine country of El Dorado: you would
LINE 139: not be here eating preserved citrons and pistachio-nuts."
LINE 140: "All that is very well," answered Candide, "but let us cultivate our
LINE 141: garden."