LINE 1: IT'S time Anne was in to do her sewing," said Marilla, glancing at the
LINE 2: clock and then out into the yellow August afternoon where everything
LINE 3: drowsed in the heat. "She stayed playing with Diana more than half an
LINE 4: hour more 'n I gave her leave to; and now she's perched out there on
LINE 5: the woodpile talking to Matthew, nineteen to the dozen, when she knows
LINE 6: perfectly well she ought to be at her work. And of course he's listening
LINE 7: to her like a perfect ninny. I never saw such an infatuated man.
LINE 8: The more she talks and the odder the things she says, the more he's
LINE 9: delighted evidently. Anne Shirley, you come right in here this minute,
LINE 10: do you hear me!"
LINE 11: A series of staccato taps on the west window brought Anne flying in from
LINE 12: the yard, eyes shining, cheeks faintly flushed with pink, unbraided hair
LINE 13: streaming behind her in a torrent of brightness.
LINE 14: "Oh, Marilla," she exclaimed breathlessly, "there's going to be a
LINE 15: Sunday-school picnic next week--in Mr. Harmon Andrews's field, right
LINE 16: near the lake of Shining Waters. And Mrs. Superintendent Bell and Mrs.
LINE 17: Rachel Lynde are going to make ice cream--think of it, Marilla--_ice
LINE 18: cream!_ And, oh, Marilla, can I go to it?"
LINE 19: "Just look at the clock, if you please, Anne. What time did I tell you
LINE 20: to come in?"
LINE 21: "Two o'clock--but isn't it splendid about the picnic, Marilla? Please
LINE 22: can I go? Oh, I've never been to a picnic--I've dreamed of picnics, but
LINE 23: I've never--"
LINE 24: "Yes, I told you to come at two o'clock. And it's a quarter to three.
LINE 25: I'd like to know why you didn't obey me, Anne."
LINE 26: "Why, I meant to, Marilla, as much as could be. But you have no idea
LINE 27: how fascinating Idlewild is. And then, of course, I had to tell Matthew
LINE 28: about the picnic. Matthew is such a sympathetic listener. Please can I
LINE 29: go?"
LINE 30: "You'll have to learn to resist the fascination of
LINE 31: Idle-whatever-you-call-it. When I tell you to come in at a certain time
LINE 32: I mean that time and not half an hour later. And you needn't stop to
LINE 33: discourse with sympathetic listeners on your way, either. As for the
LINE 34: picnic, of course you can go. You're a Sunday-school scholar, and it's
LINE 35: not likely I'd refuse to let you go when all the other little girls are
LINE 36: going."
LINE 37: "But--but," faltered Anne, "Diana says that everybody must take a basket
LINE 38: of things to eat. I can't cook, as you know, Marilla, and--and--I don't
LINE 39: mind going to a picnic without puffed sleeves so much, but I'd feel
LINE 40: terribly humiliated if I had to go without a basket. It's been preying
LINE 41: on my mind ever since Diana told me."
LINE 42: "Well, it needn't prey any longer. I'll bake you a basket."
LINE 43: "Oh, you dear good Marilla. Oh, you are so kind to me. Oh, I'm so much
LINE 44: obliged to you."
LINE 45: Getting through with her "ohs" Anne cast herself into Marilla's arms and
LINE 46: rapturously kissed her sallow cheek. It was the first time in her whole
LINE 47: life that childish lips had voluntarily touched Marilla's face. Again
LINE 48: that sudden sensation of startling sweetness thrilled her. She was
LINE 49: secretly vastly pleased at Anne's impulsive caress, which was probably
LINE 50: the reason why she said brusquely:
LINE 51: "There, there, never mind your kissing nonsense. I'd sooner see you
LINE 52: doing strictly as you're told. As for cooking, I mean to begin giving
LINE 53: you lessons in that some of these days. But you're so featherbrained,
LINE 54: Anne, I've been waiting to see if you'd sober down a little and learn
LINE 55: to be steady before I begin. You've got to keep your wits about you in
LINE 56: cooking and not stop in the middle of things to let your thoughts rove
LINE 57: all over creation. Now, get out your patchwork and have your square done
LINE 58: before teatime."
LINE 59: "I do _not_ like patchwork," said Anne dolefully, hunting out her
LINE 60: workbasket and sitting down before a little heap of red and white
LINE 61: diamonds with a sigh. "I think some kinds of sewing would be nice; but
LINE 62: there's no scope for imagination in patchwork. It's just one little seam
LINE 63: after another and you never seem to be getting anywhere. But of course
LINE 64: I'd rather be Anne of Green Gables sewing patchwork than Anne of any
LINE 65: other place with nothing to do but play. I wish time went as quick
LINE 66: sewing patches as it does when I'm playing with Diana, though. Oh, we
LINE 67: do have such elegant times, Marilla. I have to furnish most of the
LINE 68: imagination, but I'm well able to do that. Diana is simply perfect in
LINE 69: every other way. You know that little piece of land across the brook
LINE 70: that runs up between our farm and Mr. Barry's. It belongs to Mr. William
LINE 71: Bell, and right in the corner there is a little ring of white birch
LINE 72: trees--the most romantic spot, Marilla. Diana and I have our playhouse
LINE 73: there. We call it Idlewild. Isn't that a poetical name? I assure you it
LINE 74: took me some time to think it out. I stayed awake nearly a whole night
LINE 75: before I invented it. Then, just as I was dropping off to sleep, it came
LINE 76: like an inspiration. Diana was _enraptured_ when she heard it. We have got
LINE 77: our house fixed up elegantly. You must come and see it, Marilla--won't
LINE 78: you? We have great big stones, all covered with moss, for seats, and
LINE 79: boards from tree to tree for shelves. And we have all our dishes on
LINE 80: them. Of course, they're all broken but it's the easiest thing in the
LINE 81: world to imagine that they are whole. There's a piece of a plate with a
LINE 82: spray of red and yellow ivy on it that is especially beautiful. We keep
LINE 83: it in the parlor and we have the fairy glass there, too. The fairy glass
LINE 84: is as lovely as a dream. Diana found it out in the woods behind their
LINE 85: chicken house. It's all full of rainbows--just little young rainbows
LINE 86: that haven't grown big yet--and Diana's mother told her it was broken
LINE 87: off a hanging lamp they once had. But it's nice to imagine the fairies
LINE 88: lost it one night when they had a ball, so we call it the fairy glass.
LINE 89: Matthew is going to make us a table. Oh, we have named that little round
LINE 90: pool over in Mr. Barry's field Willowmere. I got that name out of the
LINE 91: book Diana lent me. That was a thrilling book, Marilla. The heroine
LINE 92: had five lovers. I'd be satisfied with one, wouldn't you? She was very
LINE 93: handsome and she went through great tribulations. She could faint as
LINE 94: easy as anything. I'd love to be able to faint, wouldn't you, Marilla?
LINE 95: It's so romantic. But I'm really very healthy for all I'm so thin. I
LINE 96: believe I'm getting fatter, though. Don't you think I am? I look at my
LINE 97: elbows every morning when I get up to see if any dimples are coming.
LINE 98: Diana is having a new dress made with elbow sleeves. She is going to
LINE 99: wear it to the picnic. Oh, I do hope it will be fine next Wednesday. I
LINE 100: don't feel that I could endure the disappointment if anything happened
LINE 101: to prevent me from getting to the picnic. I suppose I'd live through it,
LINE 102: but I'm certain it would be a lifelong sorrow. It wouldn't matter if
LINE 103: I got to a hundred picnics in after years; they wouldn't make up for
LINE 104: missing this one. They're going to have boats on the Lake of Shining
LINE 105: Waters--and ice cream, as I told you. I have never tasted ice cream.
LINE 106: Diana tried to explain what it was like, but I guess ice cream is one of
LINE 107: those things that are beyond imagination."
LINE 108: "Anne, you have talked even on for ten minutes by the clock," said
LINE 109: Marilla. "Now, just for curiosity's sake, see if you can hold your
LINE 110: tongue for the same length of time."
LINE 111: Anne held her tongue as desired. But for the rest of the week she talked
LINE 112: picnic and thought picnic and dreamed picnic. On Saturday it rained and
LINE 113: she worked herself up into such a frantic state lest it should keep
LINE 114: on raining until and over Wednesday that Marilla made her sew an extra
LINE 115: patchwork square by way of steadying her nerves.
LINE 116: On Sunday Anne confided to Marilla on the way home from church that she
LINE 117: grew actually cold all over with excitement when the minister announced
LINE 118: the picnic from the pulpit.
LINE 119: "Such a thrill as went up and down my back, Marilla! I don't think I'd
LINE 120: ever really believed until then that there was honestly going to be
LINE 121: a picnic. I couldn't help fearing I'd only imagined it. But when a
LINE 122: minister says a thing in the pulpit you just have to believe it."
LINE 123: "You set your heart too much on things, Anne," said Marilla, with a
LINE 124: sigh. "I'm afraid there'll be a great many disappointments in store for
LINE 125: you through life."
LINE 126: "Oh, Marilla, looking forward to things is half the pleasure of them,"
LINE 127: exclaimed Anne. "You mayn't get the things themselves; but nothing can
LINE 128: prevent you from having the fun of looking forward to them. Mrs.
LINE 129: Lynde says, 'Blessed are they who expect nothing for they shall not be
LINE 130: disappointed.' But I think it would be worse to expect nothing than to
LINE 131: be disappointed."
LINE 132: Marilla wore her amethyst brooch to church that day as usual. Marilla
LINE 133: always wore her amethyst brooch to church. She would have thought it
LINE 134: rather sacrilegious to leave it off--as bad as forgetting her Bible or
LINE 135: her collection dime. That amethyst brooch was Marilla's most treasured
LINE 136: possession. A seafaring uncle had given it to her mother who in turn
LINE 137: had bequeathed it to Marilla. It was an old-fashioned oval, containing
LINE 138: a braid of her mother's hair, surrounded by a border of very fine
LINE 139: amethysts. Marilla knew too little about precious stones to realize how
LINE 140: fine the amethysts actually were; but she thought them very beautiful
LINE 141: and was always pleasantly conscious of their violet shimmer at her
LINE 142: throat, above her good brown satin dress, even although she could not
LINE 143: see it.
LINE 144: Anne had been smitten with delighted admiration when she first saw that
LINE 145: brooch.
LINE 146: "Oh, Marilla, it's a perfectly elegant brooch. I don't know how you
LINE 147: can pay attention to the sermon or the prayers when you have it on. I
LINE 148: couldn't, I know. I think amethysts are just sweet. They are what I used
LINE 149: to think diamonds were like. Long ago, before I had ever seen a diamond,
LINE 150: I read about them and I tried to imagine what they would be like. I
LINE 151: thought they would be lovely glimmering purple stones. When I saw a
LINE 152: real diamond in a lady's ring one day I was so disappointed I cried. Of
LINE 153: course, it was very lovely but it wasn't my idea of a diamond. Will you
LINE 154: let me hold the brooch for one minute, Marilla? Do you think amethysts
LINE 155: can be the souls of good violets?"