LINE 1: WELL, how do you like them?" said Marilla.
LINE 2: Anne was standing in the gable room, looking solemnly at three new
LINE 3: dresses spread out on the bed. One was of snuffy colored gingham which
LINE 4: Marilla had been tempted to buy from a peddler the preceding summer
LINE 5: because it looked so serviceable; one was of black-and-white checkered
LINE 6: sateen which she had picked up at a bargain counter in the winter; and
LINE 7: one was a stiff print of an ugly blue shade which she had purchased that
LINE 8: week at a Carmody store.
LINE 9: She had made them up herself, and they were all made alike--plain skirts
LINE 10: fulled tightly to plain waists, with sleeves as plain as waist and skirt
LINE 11: and tight as sleeves could be.
LINE 12: "I'll imagine that I like them," said Anne soberly.
LINE 13: "I don't want you to imagine it," said Marilla, offended. "Oh, I can see
LINE 14: you don't like the dresses! What is the matter with them? Aren't they
LINE 15: neat and clean and new?"
LINE 16: "Yes."
LINE 17: "Then why don't you like them?"
LINE 18: "They're--they're not--pretty," said Anne reluctantly.
LINE 19: "Pretty!" Marilla sniffed. "I didn't trouble my head about getting
LINE 20: pretty dresses for you. I don't believe in pampering vanity, Anne, I'll
LINE 21: tell you that right off. Those dresses are good, sensible, serviceable
LINE 22: dresses, without any frills or furbelows about them, and they're all
LINE 23: you'll get this summer. The brown gingham and the blue print will do
LINE 24: you for school when you begin to go. The sateen is for church and Sunday
LINE 25: school. I'll expect you to keep them neat and clean and not to tear
LINE 26: them. I should think you'd be grateful to get most anything after those
LINE 27: skimpy wincey things you've been wearing."
LINE 28: "Oh, I _am_ grateful," protested Anne. "But I'd be ever so much
LINE 29: gratefuller if--if you'd made just one of them with puffed sleeves.
LINE 30: Puffed sleeves are so fashionable now. It would give me such a thrill,
LINE 31: Marilla, just to wear a dress with puffed sleeves."
LINE 32: "Well, you'll have to do without your thrill. I hadn't any material
LINE 33: to waste on puffed sleeves. I think they are ridiculous-looking things
LINE 34: anyhow. I prefer the plain, sensible ones."
LINE 35: "But I'd rather look ridiculous when everybody else does than plain and
LINE 36: sensible all by myself," persisted Anne mournfully.
LINE 37: "Trust you for that! Well, hang those dresses carefully up in your
LINE 38: closet, and then sit down and learn the Sunday school lesson. I got
LINE 39: a quarterly from Mr. Bell for you and you'll go to Sunday school
LINE 40: tomorrow," said Marilla, disappearing downstairs in high dudgeon.
LINE 41: Anne clasped her hands and looked at the dresses.
LINE 42: "I did hope there would be a white one with puffed sleeves," she
LINE 43: whispered disconsolately. "I prayed for one, but I didn't much expect it
LINE 44: on that account. I didn't suppose God would have time to bother about
LINE 45: a little orphan girl's dress. I knew I'd just have to depend on
LINE 46: Marilla for it. Well, fortunately I can imagine that one of them is of
LINE 47: snow-white muslin with lovely lace frills and three-puffed sleeves."
LINE 48: The next morning warnings of a sick headache prevented Marilla from
LINE 49: going to Sunday-school with Anne.
LINE 50: "You'll have to go down and call for Mrs. Lynde, Anne," she said.
LINE 51: "She'll see that you get into the right class. Now, mind you behave
LINE 52: yourself properly. Stay to preaching afterwards and ask Mrs. Lynde to
LINE 53: show you our pew. Here's a cent for collection. Don't stare at people
LINE 54: and don't fidget. I shall expect you to tell me the text when you come
LINE 55: home."
LINE 56: Anne started off irreproachable, arrayed in the stiff black-and-white
LINE 57: sateen, which, while decent as regards length and certainly not open to
LINE 58: the charge of skimpiness, contrived to emphasize every corner and angle
LINE 59: of her thin figure. Her hat was a little, flat, glossy, new sailor, the
LINE 60: extreme plainness of which had likewise much disappointed Anne, who
LINE 61: had permitted herself secret visions of ribbon and flowers. The latter,
LINE 62: however, were supplied before Anne reached the main road, for being
LINE 63: confronted halfway down the lane with a golden frenzy of wind-stirred
LINE 64: buttercups and a glory of wild roses, Anne promptly and liberally
LINE 65: garlanded her hat with a heavy wreath of them. Whatever other people
LINE 66: might have thought of the result it satisfied Anne, and she tripped
LINE 67: gaily down the road, holding her ruddy head with its decoration of pink
LINE 68: and yellow very proudly.
LINE 69: When she had reached Mrs. Lynde's house she found that lady gone.
LINE 70: Nothing daunted, Anne proceeded onward to the church alone. In the porch
LINE 71: she found a crowd of little girls, all more or less gaily attired in
LINE 72: whites and blues and pinks, and all staring with curious eyes at this
LINE 73: stranger in their midst, with her extraordinary head adornment. Avonlea
LINE 74: little girls had already heard queer stories about Anne. Mrs. Lynde said
LINE 75: she had an awful temper; Jerry Buote, the hired boy at Green Gables,
LINE 76: said she talked all the time to herself or to the trees and flowers
LINE 77: like a crazy girl. They looked at her and whispered to each other behind
LINE 78: their quarterlies. Nobody made any friendly advances, then or later
LINE 79: on when the opening exercises were over and Anne found herself in Miss
LINE 80: Rogerson's class.
LINE 81: Miss Rogerson was a middle-aged lady who had taught a Sunday-school
LINE 82: class for twenty years. Her method of teaching was to ask the printed
LINE 83: questions from the quarterly and look sternly over its edge at the
LINE 84: particular little girl she thought ought to answer the question. She
LINE 85: looked very often at Anne, and Anne, thanks to Marilla's drilling,
LINE 86: answered promptly; but it may be questioned if she understood very much
LINE 87: about either question or answer.
LINE 88: She did not think she liked Miss Rogerson, and she felt very miserable;
LINE 89: every other little girl in the class had puffed sleeves. Anne felt that
LINE 90: life was really not worth living without puffed sleeves.
LINE 91: "Well, how did you like Sunday school?" Marilla wanted to know when Anne
LINE 92: came home. Her wreath having faded, Anne had discarded it in the lane,
LINE 93: so Marilla was spared the knowledge of that for a time.
LINE 94: "I didn't like it a bit. It was horrid."
LINE 95: "Anne Shirley!" said Marilla rebukingly.
LINE 96: Anne sat down on the rocker with a long sigh, kissed one of Bonny's
LINE 97: leaves, and waved her hand to a blossoming fuchsia.
LINE 98: "They might have been lonesome while I was away," she explained. "And
LINE 99: now about the Sunday school. I behaved well, just as you told me. Mrs.
LINE 100: Lynde was gone, but I went right on myself. I went into the church, with
LINE 101: a lot of other little girls, and I sat in the corner of a pew by the
LINE 102: window while the opening exercises went on. Mr. Bell made an awfully
LINE 103: long prayer. I would have been dreadfully tired before he got through
LINE 104: if I hadn't been sitting by that window. But it looked right out on the
LINE 105: Lake of Shining Waters, so I just gazed at that and imagined all sorts
LINE 106: of splendid things."
LINE 107: "You shouldn't have done anything of the sort. You should have listened
LINE 108: to Mr. Bell."
LINE 109: "But he wasn't talking to me," protested Anne. "He was talking to God
LINE 110: and he didn't seem to be very much inter-ested in it, either. I think
LINE 111: he thought God was too far off though. There was a long row of white
LINE 112: birches hanging over the lake and the sunshine fell down through
LINE 113: them, 'way, 'way down, deep into the water. Oh, Marilla, it was like a
LINE 114: beautiful dream! It gave me a thrill and I just said, 'Thank you for it,
LINE 115: God,' two or three times."
LINE 116: "Not out loud, I hope," said Marilla anxiously.
LINE 117: "Oh, no, just under my breath. Well, Mr. Bell did get through at last
LINE 118: and they told me to go into the classroom with Miss Rogerson's class.
LINE 119: There were nine other girls in it. They all had puffed sleeves. I tried
LINE 120: to imagine mine were puffed, too, but I couldn't. Why couldn't I? It was
LINE 121: as easy as could be to imagine they were puffed when I was alone in
LINE 122: the east gable, but it was awfully hard there among the others who had
LINE 123: really truly puffs."
LINE 124: "You shouldn't have been thinking about your sleeves in Sunday school.
LINE 125: You should have been attending to the lesson. I hope you knew it."
LINE 126: "Oh, yes; and I answered a lot of questions. Miss Rogerson asked ever so
LINE 127: many. I don't think it was fair for her to do all the asking. There were
LINE 128: lots I wanted to ask her, but I didn't like to because I didn't think
LINE 129: she was a kindred spirit. Then all the other little girls recited a
LINE 130: paraphrase. She asked me if I knew any. I told her I didn't, but I could
LINE 131: recite, 'The Dog at His Master's Grave' if she liked. That's in the
LINE 132: Third Royal Reader. It isn't a really truly religious piece of poetry,
LINE 133: but it's so sad and melancholy that it might as well be. She said it
LINE 134: wouldn't do and she told me to learn the nineteenth paraphrase for next
LINE 135: Sunday. I read it over in church afterwards and it's splendid. There are
LINE 136: two lines in particular that just thrill me.
LINE 137: "'Quick as the slaughtered squadrons fell
LINE 138: In Midian's evil day.'
LINE 139: "I don't know what 'squadrons' means nor 'Midian,' either, but it sounds
LINE 140: _so_ tragical. I can hardly wait until next Sunday to recite it.
LINE 141: I'll practice it all the week. After Sunday school I asked Miss
LINE 142: Rogerson--because Mrs. Lynde was too far away--to show me your pew.
LINE 143: I sat just as still as I could and the text was Revelations, third
LINE 144: chapter, second and third verses. It was a very long text. If I was a
LINE 145: minister I'd pick the short, snappy ones. The sermon was awfully long,
LINE 146: too. I suppose the minister had to match it to the text. I didn't think
LINE 147: he was a bit interesting. The trouble with him seems to be that he
LINE 148: hasn't enough imagination. I didn't listen to him very much. I just let
LINE 149: my thoughts run and I thought of the most surprising things."
LINE 150: Marilla felt helplessly that all this should be sternly reproved, but
LINE 151: she was hampered by the undeniable fact that some of the things Anne had
LINE 152: said, especially about the minister's sermons and Mr. Bell's prayers,
LINE 153: were what she herself had really thought deep down in her heart for
LINE 154: years, but had never given expression to. It almost seemed to her that
LINE 155: those secret, unuttered, critical thoughts had suddenly taken visible
LINE 156: and accusing shape and form in the person of this outspoken morsel of
LINE 157: neglected humanity.