LINE 1: IT was October again when Anne was ready to go back to school--a
LINE 2: glorious October, all red and gold, with mellow mornings when the
LINE 3: valleys were filled with delicate mists as if the spirit of autumn had
LINE 4: poured them in for the sun to drain--amethyst, pearl, silver, rose, and
LINE 5: smoke-blue. The dews were so heavy that the fields glistened like cloth
LINE 6: of silver and there were such heaps of rustling leaves in the hollows of
LINE 7: many-stemmed woods to run crisply through. The Birch Path was a canopy
LINE 8: of yellow and the ferns were sear and brown all along it. There was a
LINE 9: tang in the very air that inspired the hearts of small maidens tripping,
LINE 10: unlike snails, swiftly and willingly to school; and it _was_ jolly to
LINE 11: be back again at the little brown desk beside Diana, with Ruby Gillis
LINE 12: nodding across the aisle and Carrie Sloane sending up notes and Julia
LINE 13: Bell passing a "chew" of gum down from the back seat. Anne drew a long
LINE 14: breath of happiness as she sharpened her pencil and arranged her picture
LINE 15: cards in her desk. Life was certainly very interesting.
LINE 16: In the new teacher she found another true and helpful friend. Miss Stacy
LINE 17: was a bright, sympathetic young woman with the happy gift of winning and
LINE 18: holding the affections of her pupils and bringing out the best that was
LINE 19: in them mentally and morally. Anne expanded like a flower under this
LINE 20: wholesome influence and carried home to the admiring Matthew and the
LINE 21: critical Marilla glowing accounts of schoolwork and aims.
LINE 22: "I love Miss Stacy with my whole heart, Marilla. She is so ladylike
LINE 23: and she has such a sweet voice. When she pronounces my name I feel
LINE 24: _instinctively_ that she's spelling it with an E. We had recitations
LINE 25: this afternoon. I just wish you could have been there to hear me recite
LINE 26: 'Mary, Queen of Scots.' I just put my whole soul into it. Ruby Gillis
LINE 27: told me coming home that the way I said the line, 'Now for my father's
LINE 28: arm,' she said, 'my woman's heart farewell,' just made her blood run
LINE 29: cold."
LINE 30: "Well now, you might recite it for me some of these days, out in the
LINE 31: barn," suggested Matthew.
LINE 32: "Of course I will," said Anne meditatively, "but I won't be able to do
LINE 33: it so well, I know. It won't be so exciting as it is when you have a
LINE 34: whole schoolful before you hanging breathlessly on your words. I know I
LINE 35: won't be able to make your blood run cold."
LINE 36: "Mrs. Lynde says it made _her_ blood run cold to see the boys climbing to
LINE 37: the very tops of those big trees on Bell's hill after crows' nests last
LINE 38: Friday," said Marilla. "I wonder at Miss Stacy for encouraging it."
LINE 39: "But we wanted a crow's nest for nature study," explained Anne. "That
LINE 40: was on our field afternoon. Field afternoons are splendid, Marilla.
LINE 41: And Miss Stacy explains everything so beautifully. We have to write
LINE 42: compositions on our field afternoons and I write the best ones."
LINE 43: "It's very vain of you to say so then. You'd better let your teacher say
LINE 44: it."
LINE 45: "But she _did_ say it, Marilla. And indeed I'm not vain about it. How can
LINE 46: I be, when I'm such a dunce at geometry? Although I'm really beginning
LINE 47: to see through it a little, too. Miss Stacy makes it so clear. Still,
LINE 48: I'll never be good at it and I assure you it is a humbling reflection.
LINE 49: But I love writing compositions. Mostly Miss Stacy lets us choose
LINE 50: our own subjects; but next week we are to write a composition on some
LINE 51: remarkable person. It's hard to choose among so many remarkable people
LINE 52: who have lived. Mustn't it be splendid to be remarkable and have
LINE 53: compositions written about you after you're dead? Oh, I would dearly
LINE 54: love to be remarkable. I think when I grow up I'll be a trained nurse
LINE 55: and go with the Red Crosses to the field of battle as a messenger of
LINE 56: mercy. That is, if I don't go out as a foreign missionary. That would
LINE 57: be very romantic, but one would have to be very good to be a missionary,
LINE 58: and that would be a stumbling block. We have physical culture exercises
LINE 59: every day, too. They make you graceful and promote digestion."
LINE 60: "Promote fiddlesticks!" said Marilla, who honestly thought it was all
LINE 61: nonsense.
LINE 62: But all the field afternoons and recitation Fridays and physical culture
LINE 63: contortions paled before a project which Miss Stacy brought forward in
LINE 64: November. This was that the scholars of Avonlea school should get up
LINE 65: a concert and hold it in the hall on Christmas Night, for the laudable
LINE 66: purpose of helping to pay for a schoolhouse flag. The pupils one and
LINE 67: all taking graciously to this plan, the preparations for a program
LINE 68: were begun at once. And of all the excited performers-elect none was so
LINE 69: excited as Anne Shirley, who threw herself into the undertaking heart
LINE 70: and soul, hampered as she was by Marilla's disapproval. Marilla thought
LINE 71: it all rank foolishness.
LINE 72: "It's just filling your heads up with nonsense and taking time that
LINE 73: ought to be put on your lessons," she grumbled. "I don't approve of
LINE 74: children's getting up concerts and racing about to practices. It makes
LINE 75: them vain and forward and fond of gadding."
LINE 76: "But think of the worthy object," pleaded Anne. "A flag will cultivate a
LINE 77: spirit of patriotism, Marilla."
LINE 78: "Fudge! There's precious little patriotism in the thoughts of any of
LINE 79: you. All you want is a good time."
LINE 80: "Well, when you can combine patriotism and fun, isn't it all right? Of
LINE 81: course it's real nice to be getting up a concert. We're going to have
LINE 82: six choruses and Diana is to sing a solo. I'm in two dialogues--'The
LINE 83: Society for the Suppression of Gossip' and 'The Fairy Queen.' The boys
LINE 84: are going to have a dialogue too. And I'm to have two recitations,
LINE 85: Marilla. I just tremble when I think of it, but it's a nice thrilly kind
LINE 86: of tremble. And we're to have a tableau at the last--'Faith, Hope and
LINE 87: Charity.' Diana and Ruby and I are to be in it, all draped in white with
LINE 88: flowing hair. I'm to be Hope, with my hands clasped--so--and my eyes
LINE 89: uplifted. I'm going to practice my recitations in the garret. Don't be
LINE 90: alarmed if you hear me groaning. I have to groan heartrendingly in one
LINE 91: of them, and it's really hard to get up a good artistic groan, Marilla.
LINE 92: Josie Pye is sulky because she didn't get the part she wanted in
LINE 93: the dialogue. She wanted to be the fairy queen. That would have been
LINE 94: ridiculous, for who ever heard of a fairy queen as fat as Josie? Fairy
LINE 95: queens must be slender. Jane Andrews is to be the queen and I am to be
LINE 96: one of her maids of honor. Josie says she thinks a red-haired fairy is
LINE 97: just as ridiculous as a fat one, but I do not let myself mind what Josie
LINE 98: says. I'm to have a wreath of white roses on my hair and Ruby Gillis
LINE 99: is going to lend me her slippers because I haven't any of my own. It's
LINE 100: necessary for fairies to have slippers, you know. You couldn't imagine
LINE 101: a fairy wearing boots, could you? Especially with copper toes? We are
LINE 102: going to decorate the hall with creeping spruce and fir mottoes with
LINE 103: pink tissue-paper roses in them. And we are all to march in two by two
LINE 104: after the audience is seated, while Emma White plays a march on the
LINE 105: organ. Oh, Marilla, I know you are not so enthusiastic about it as I am,
LINE 106: but don't you hope your little Anne will distinguish herself?"
LINE 107: "All I hope is that you'll behave yourself. I'll be heartily glad when
LINE 108: all this fuss is over and you'll be able to settle down. You are simply
LINE 109: good for nothing just now with your head stuffed full of dialogues and
LINE 110: groans and tableaus. As for your tongue, it's a marvel it's not clean
LINE 111: worn out."
LINE 112: Anne sighed and betook herself to the back yard, over which a young new
LINE 113: moon was shining through the leafless poplar boughs from an apple-green
LINE 114: western sky, and where Matthew was splitting wood. Anne perched herself
LINE 115: on a block and talked the concert over with him, sure of an appreciative
LINE 116: and sympathetic listener in this instance at least.
LINE 117: "Well now, I reckon it's going to be a pretty good concert. And I
LINE 118: expect you'll do your part fine," he said, smiling down into her eager,
LINE 119: vivacious little face. Anne smiled back at him. Those two were the best
LINE 120: of friends and Matthew thanked his stars many a time and oft that he had
LINE 121: nothing to do with bringing her up. That was Marilla's exclusive duty;
LINE 122: if it had been his he would have been worried over frequent conflicts
LINE 123: between inclination and said duty. As it was, he was free to, "spoil
LINE 124: Anne"--Marilla's phrasing--as much as he liked. But it was not such a
LINE 125: bad arrangement after all; a little "appreciation" sometimes does quite
LINE 126: as much good as all the conscientious "bringing up" in the world.