LINE 1: AND what are your eyes popping out of your head about. Now?" asked
LINE 2: Marilla, when Anne had just come in from a run to the post office. "Have
LINE 3: you discovered another kindred spirit?" Excitement hung around Anne like
LINE 4: a garment, shone in her eyes, kindled in every feature. She had come
LINE 5: dancing up the lane, like a wind-blown sprite, through the mellow
LINE 6: sunshine and lazy shadows of the August evening.
LINE 7: "No, Marilla, but oh, what do you think? I am invited to tea at the
LINE 8: manse tomorrow afternoon! Mrs. Allan left the letter for me at the post
LINE 9: office. Just look at it, Marilla. 'Miss Anne Shirley, Green Gables.'
LINE 10: That is the first time I was ever called 'Miss.' Such a thrill as it
LINE 11: gave me! I shall cherish it forever among my choicest treasures."
LINE 12: "Mrs. Allan told me she meant to have all the members of her
LINE 13: Sunday-school class to tea in turn," said Marilla, regarding the
LINE 14: wonderful event very coolly. "You needn't get in such a fever over it.
LINE 15: Do learn to take things calmly, child."
LINE 16: For Anne to take things calmly would have been to change her nature. All
LINE 17: "spirit and fire and dew," as she was, the pleasures and pains of life
LINE 18: came to her with trebled intensity. Marilla felt this and was vaguely
LINE 19: troubled over it, realizing that the ups and downs of existence would
LINE 20: probably bear hardly on this impulsive soul and not sufficiently
LINE 21: understanding that the equally great capacity for delight might more
LINE 22: than compensate. Therefore Marilla conceived it to be her duty to drill
LINE 23: Anne into a tranquil uniformity of disposition as impossible and alien
LINE 24: to her as to a dancing sunbeam in one of the brook shallows. She did not
LINE 25: make much headway, as she sorrowfully admitted to herself. The downfall
LINE 26: of some dear hope or plan plunged Anne into "deeps of affliction." The
LINE 27: fulfillment thereof exalted her to dizzy realms of delight. Marilla had
LINE 28: almost begun to despair of ever fashioning this waif of the world into
LINE 29: her model little girl of demure manners and prim deportment. Neither
LINE 30: would she have believed that she really liked Anne much better as she
LINE 31: was.
LINE 32: Anne went to bed that night speechless with misery because Matthew had
LINE 33: said the wind was round northeast and he feared it would be a rainy day
LINE 34: tomorrow. The rustle of the poplar leaves about the house worried her,
LINE 35: it sounded so like pattering raindrops, and the full, faraway roar of
LINE 36: the gulf, to which she listened delightedly at other times, loving its
LINE 37: strange, sonorous, haunting rhythm, now seemed like a prophecy of storm
LINE 38: and disaster to a small maiden who particularly wanted a fine day. Anne
LINE 39: thought that the morning would never come.
LINE 40: But all things have an end, even nights before the day on which you are
LINE 41: invited to take tea at the manse. The morning, in spite of Matthew's
LINE 42: predictions, was fine and Anne's spirits soared to their highest.
LINE 43: "Oh, Marilla, there is something in me today that makes me just love
LINE 44: everybody I see," she exclaimed as she washed the breakfast dishes.
LINE 45: "You don't know how good I feel! Wouldn't it be nice if it could last? I
LINE 46: believe I could be a model child if I were just invited out to tea every
LINE 47: day. But oh, Marilla, it's a solemn occasion too. I feel so anxious.
LINE 48: What if I shouldn't behave properly? You know I never had tea at a
LINE 49: manse before, and I'm not sure that I know all the rules of etiquette,
LINE 50: although I've been studying the rules given in the Etiquette Department
LINE 51: of the Family Herald ever since I came here. I'm so afraid I'll do
LINE 52: something silly or forget to do something I should do. Would it be
LINE 53: good manners to take a second helping of anything if you wanted to _very_
LINE 54: much?"
LINE 55: "The trouble with you, Anne, is that you're thinking too much about
LINE 56: yourself. You should just think of Mrs. Allan and what would be nicest
LINE 57: and most agreeable to her," said Marilla, hitting for once in her life
LINE 58: on a very sound and pithy piece of advice. Anne instantly realized this.
LINE 59: "You are right, Marilla. I'll try not to think about myself at all."
LINE 60: Anne evidently got through her visit without any serious breach of
LINE 61: "etiquette," for she came home through the twilight, under a great,
LINE 62: high-sprung sky gloried over with trails of saffron and rosy cloud, in
LINE 63: a beatified state of mind and told Marilla all about it happily, sitting
LINE 64: on the big red-sandstone slab at the kitchen door with her tired curly
LINE 65: head in Marilla's gingham lap.
LINE 66: A cool wind was blowing down over the long harvest fields from the rims
LINE 67: of firry western hills and whistling through the poplars. One clear star
LINE 68: hung over the orchard and the fireflies were flitting over in Lover's
LINE 69: Lane, in and out among the ferns and rustling boughs. Anne watched them
LINE 70: as she talked and somehow felt that wind and stars and fireflies were
LINE 71: all tangled up together into something unutterably sweet and enchanting.
LINE 72: "Oh, Marilla, I've had a most _fascinating_ time. I feel that I have not
LINE 73: lived in vain and I shall always feel like that even if I should never
LINE 74: be invited to tea at a manse again. When I got there Mrs. Allan met me
LINE 75: at the door. She was dressed in the sweetest dress of pale-pink organdy,
LINE 76: with dozens of frills and elbow sleeves, and she looked just like a
LINE 77: seraph. I really think I'd like to be a minister's wife when I grow up,
LINE 78: Marilla. A minister mightn't mind my red hair because he wouldn't be
LINE 79: thinking of such worldly things. But then of course one would have to
LINE 80: be naturally good and I'll never be that, so I suppose there's no use in
LINE 81: thinking about it. Some people are naturally good, you know, and others
LINE 82: are not. I'm one of the others. Mrs. Lynde says I'm full of original
LINE 83: sin. No matter how hard I try to be good I can never make such a success
LINE 84: of it as those who are naturally good. It's a good deal like geometry,
LINE 85: I expect. But don't you think the trying so hard ought to count for
LINE 86: something? Mrs. Allan is one of the naturally good people. I love her
LINE 87: passionately. You know there are some people, like Matthew and Mrs.
LINE 88: Allan that you can love right off without any trouble. And there are
LINE 89: others, like Mrs. Lynde, that you have to try very hard to love. You
LINE 90: know you _ought_ to love them because they know so much and are such
LINE 91: active workers in the church, but you have to keep reminding yourself of
LINE 92: it all the time or else you forget. There was another little girl at the
LINE 93: manse to tea, from the White Sands Sunday school. Her name was Laurette
LINE 94: Bradley, and she was a very nice little girl. Not exactly a kindred
LINE 95: spirit, you know, but still very nice. We had an elegant tea, and I
LINE 96: think I kept all the rules of etiquette pretty well. After tea Mrs.
LINE 97: Allan played and sang and she got Lauretta and me to sing too.
LINE 98: Mrs. Allan says I have a good voice and she says I must sing in the
LINE 99: Sunday-school choir after this. You can't think how I was thrilled at
LINE 100: the mere thought. I've longed so to sing in the Sunday-school choir,
LINE 101: as Diana does, but I feared it was an honor I could never aspire to.
LINE 102: Lauretta had to go home early because there is a big concert in the
LINE 103: White Sands Hotel tonight and her sister is to recite at it. Lauretta
LINE 104: says that the Americans at the hotel give a concert every fortnight in
LINE 105: aid of the Charlottetown hospital, and they ask lots of the White
LINE 106: Sands people to recite. Lauretta said she expected to be asked herself
LINE 107: someday. I just gazed at her in awe. After she had gone Mrs. Allan and I
LINE 108: had a heart-to-heart talk. I told her everything--about Mrs. Thomas and
LINE 109: the twins and Katie Maurice and Violetta and coming to Green Gables and
LINE 110: my troubles over geometry. And would you believe it, Marilla? Mrs.
LINE 111: Allan told me she was a dunce at geometry too. You don't know how that
LINE 112: encouraged me. Mrs. Lynde came to the manse just before I left, and what
LINE 113: do you think, Marilla? The trustees have hired a new teacher and it's
LINE 114: a lady. Her name is Miss Muriel Stacy. Isn't that a romantic name? Mrs.
LINE 115: Lynde says they've never had a female teacher in Avonlea before and she
LINE 116: thinks it is a dangerous innovation. But I think it will be splendid
LINE 117: to have a lady teacher, and I really don't see how I'm going to live
LINE 118: through the two weeks before school begins. I'm so impatient to see
LINE 119: her."