LINE 1: ANNE'S homesickness wore off, greatly helped in the wearing by her
LINE 2: weekend visits home. As long as the open weather lasted the Avonlea
LINE 3: students went out to Carmody on the new branch railway every Friday
LINE 4: night. Diana and several other Avonlea young folks were generally on
LINE 5: hand to meet them and they all walked over to Avonlea in a merry party.
LINE 6: Anne thought those Friday evening gypsyings over the autumnal hills in
LINE 7: the crisp golden air, with the homelights of Avonlea twinkling beyond,
LINE 8: were the best and dearest hours in the whole week.
LINE 9: Gilbert Blythe nearly always walked with Ruby Gillis and carried her
LINE 10: satchel for her. Ruby was a very handsome young lady, now thinking
LINE 11: herself quite as grown up as she really was; she wore her skirts as long
LINE 12: as her mother would let her and did her hair up in town, though she had
LINE 13: to take it down when she went home. She had large, bright-blue eyes,
LINE 14: a brilliant complexion, and a plump showy figure. She laughed a great
LINE 15: deal, was cheerful and good-tempered, and enjoyed the pleasant things of
LINE 16: life frankly.
LINE 17: "But I shouldn't think she was the sort of girl Gilbert would like,"
LINE 18: whispered Jane to Anne. Anne did not think so either, but she would not
LINE 19: have said so for the Avery scholarship. She could not help thinking,
LINE 20: too, that it would be very pleasant to have such a friend as Gilbert
LINE 21: to jest and chatter with and exchange ideas about books and studies and
LINE 22: ambitions. Gilbert had ambitions, she knew, and Ruby Gillis did not seem
LINE 23: the sort of person with whom such could be profitably discussed.
LINE 24: There was no silly sentiment in Anne's ideas concerning Gilbert. Boys
LINE 25: were to her, when she thought about them at all, merely possible good
LINE 26: comrades. If she and Gilbert had been friends she would not have cared
LINE 27: how many other friends he had nor with whom he walked. She had a genius
LINE 28: for friendship; girl friends she had in plenty; but she had a vague
LINE 29: consciousness that masculine friendship might also be a good thing
LINE 30: to round out one's conceptions of companionship and furnish broader
LINE 31: standpoints of judgment and comparison. Not that Anne could have put her
LINE 32: feelings on the matter into just such clear definition. But she thought
LINE 33: that if Gilbert had ever walked home with her from the train, over the
LINE 34: crisp fields and along the ferny byways, they might have had many and
LINE 35: merry and interesting conversations about the new world that was opening
LINE 36: around them and their hopes and ambitions therein. Gilbert was a clever
LINE 37: young fellow, with his own thoughts about things and a determination to
LINE 38: get the best out of life and put the best into it. Ruby Gillis told Jane
LINE 39: Andrews that she didn't understand half the things Gilbert Blythe said;
LINE 40: he talked just like Anne Shirley did when she had a thoughtful fit on
LINE 41: and for her part she didn't think it any fun to be bothering about books
LINE 42: and that sort of thing when you didn't have to. Frank Stockley had lots
LINE 43: more dash and go, but then he wasn't half as good-looking as Gilbert and
LINE 44: she really couldn't decide which she liked best!
LINE 45: In the Academy Anne gradually drew a little circle of friends about
LINE 46: her, thoughtful, imaginative, ambitious students like herself. With the
LINE 47: "rose-red" girl, Stella Maynard, and the "dream girl," Priscilla Grant,
LINE 48: she soon became intimate, finding the latter pale spiritual-looking
LINE 49: maiden to be full to the brim of mischief and pranks and fun, while the
LINE 50: vivid, black-eyed Stella had a heartful of wistful dreams and fancies,
LINE 51: as aerial and rainbow-like as Anne's own.
LINE 52: After the Christmas holidays the Avonlea students gave up going home
LINE 53: on Fridays and settled down to hard work. By this time all the Queen's
LINE 54: scholars had gravitated into their own places in the ranks and
LINE 55: the various classes had assumed distinct and settled shadings of
LINE 56: individuality. Certain facts had become generally accepted. It was
LINE 57: admitted that the medal contestants had practically narrowed down
LINE 58: to three--Gilbert Blythe, Anne Shirley, and Lewis Wilson; the Avery
LINE 59: scholarship was more doubtful, any one of a certain six being a possible
LINE 60: winner. The bronze medal for mathematics was considered as good as
LINE 61: won by a fat, funny little up-country boy with a bumpy forehead and a
LINE 62: patched coat.
LINE 63: Ruby Gillis was the handsomest girl of the year at the Academy; in the
LINE 64: Second Year classes Stella Maynard carried off the palm for beauty, with
LINE 65: small but critical minority in favor of Anne Shirley. Ethel Marr was
LINE 66: admitted by all competent judges to have the most stylish modes
LINE 67: of hair-dressing, and Jane Andrews--plain, plodding, conscientious
LINE 68: Jane--carried off the honors in the domestic science course. Even Josie
LINE 69: Pye attained a certain preeminence as the sharpest-tongued young lady in
LINE 70: attendance at Queen's. So it may be fairly stated that Miss Stacy's old
LINE 71: pupils held their own in the wider arena of the academical course.
LINE 72: Anne worked hard and steadily. Her rivalry with Gilbert was as intense
LINE 73: as it had ever been in Avonlea school, although it was not known in the
LINE 74: class at large, but somehow the bitterness had gone out of it. Anne no
LINE 75: longer wished to win for the sake of defeating Gilbert; rather, for the
LINE 76: proud consciousness of a well-won victory over a worthy foeman. It
LINE 77: would be worth while to win, but she no longer thought life would be
LINE 78: insupportable if she did not.
LINE 79: In spite of lessons the students found opportunities for pleasant times.
LINE 80: Anne spent many of her spare hours at Beechwood and generally ate her
LINE 81: Sunday dinners there and went to church with Miss Barry. The latter was,
LINE 82: as she admitted, growing old, but her black eyes were not dim nor the
LINE 83: vigor of her tongue in the least abated. But she never sharpened the
LINE 84: latter on Anne, who continued to be a prime favorite with the critical
LINE 85: old lady.
LINE 86: "That Anne-girl improves all the time," she said. "I get tired of other
LINE 87: girls--there is such a provoking and eternal sameness about them. Anne
LINE 88: has as many shades as a rainbow and every shade is the prettiest while
LINE 89: it lasts. I don't know that she is as amusing as she was when she was
LINE 90: a child, but she makes me love her and I like people who make me love
LINE 91: them. It saves me so much trouble in making myself love them."
LINE 92: Then, almost before anybody realized it, spring had come; out in
LINE 93: Avonlea the Mayflowers were peeping pinkly out on the sere barrens where
LINE 94: snow-wreaths lingered; and the "mist of green" was on the woods and in
LINE 95: the valleys. But in Charlottetown harassed Queen's students thought and
LINE 96: talked only of examinations.
LINE 97: "It doesn't seem possible that the term is nearly over," said Anne.
LINE 98: "Why, last fall it seemed so long to look forward to--a whole winter
LINE 99: of studies and classes. And here we are, with the exams looming up next
LINE 100: week. Girls, sometimes I feel as if those exams meant everything, but
LINE 101: when I look at the big buds swelling on those chestnut trees and
LINE 102: the misty blue air at the end of the streets they don't seem half so
LINE 103: important."
LINE 104: Jane and Ruby and Josie, who had dropped in, did not take this view
LINE 105: of it. To them the coming examinations were constantly very important
LINE 106: indeed--far more important than chestnut buds or Maytime hazes. It was
LINE 107: all very well for Anne, who was sure of passing at least, to have her
LINE 108: moments of belittling them, but when your whole future depended on
LINE 109: them--as the girls truly thought theirs did--you could not regard them
LINE 110: philosophically.
LINE 111: "I've lost seven pounds in the last two weeks," sighed Jane. "It's no
LINE 112: use to say don't worry. I _will_ worry. Worrying helps you some--it
LINE 113: seems as if you were doing something when you're worrying. It would be
LINE 114: dreadful if I failed to get my license after going to Queen's all winter
LINE 115: and spending so much money."
LINE 116: "_I_ don't care," said Josie Pye. "If I don't pass this year I'm coming
LINE 117: back next. My father can afford to send me. Anne, Frank Stockley says
LINE 118: that Professor Tremaine said Gilbert Blythe was sure to get the medal
LINE 119: and that Emily Clay would likely win the Avery scholarship."
LINE 120: "That may make me feel badly tomorrow, Josie," laughed Anne, "but just
LINE 121: now I honestly feel that as long as I know the violets are coming out
LINE 122: all purple down in the hollow below Green Gables and that little ferns
LINE 123: are poking their heads up in Lovers' Lane, it's not a great deal of
LINE 124: difference whether I win the Avery or not. I've done my best and I begin
LINE 125: to understand what is meant by the 'joy of the strife.' Next to trying
LINE 126: and winning, the best thing is trying and failing. Girls, don't talk
LINE 127: about exams! Look at that arch of pale green sky over those houses
LINE 128: and picture to yourself what it must look like over the purply-dark
LINE 129: beech-woods back of Avonlea."
LINE 130: "What are you going to wear for commencement, Jane?" asked Ruby
LINE 131: practically.
LINE 132: Jane and Josie both answered at once and the chatter drifted into a side
LINE 133: eddy of fashions. But Anne, with her elbows on the window sill, her soft
LINE 134: cheek laid against her clasped hands, and her eyes filled with visions,
LINE 135: looked out unheedingly across city roof and spire to that glorious dome
LINE 136: of sunset sky and wove her dreams of a possible future from the golden
LINE 137: tissue of youth's own optimism. All the Beyond was hers with its
LINE 138: possibilities lurking rosily in the oncoming years--each year a rose of
LINE 139: promise to be woven into an immortal chaplet.