LINE 1: GET there they did, however, in due season. Mrs. Spencer lived in a big
LINE 2: yellow house at White Sands Cove, and she came to the door with surprise
LINE 3: and welcome mingled on her benevolent face.
LINE 4: "Dear, dear," she exclaimed, "you're the last folks I was looking for
LINE 5: today, but I'm real glad to see you. You'll put your horse in? And how
LINE 6: are you, Anne?"
LINE 7: "I'm as well as can be expected, thank you," said Anne smilelessly. A
LINE 8: blight seemed to have descended on her.
LINE 9: "I suppose we'll stay a little while to rest the mare," said Marilla,
LINE 10: "but I promised Matthew I'd be home early. The fact is, Mrs. Spencer,
LINE 11: there's been a queer mistake somewhere, and I've come over to see where
LINE 12: it is. We send word, Matthew and I, for you to bring us a boy from the
LINE 13: asylum. We told your brother Robert to tell you we wanted a boy ten or
LINE 14: eleven years old."
LINE 15: "Marilla Cuthbert, you don't say so!" said Mrs. Spencer in distress.
LINE 16: "Why, Robert sent word down by his daughter Nancy and she said you
LINE 17: wanted a girl--didn't she Flora Jane?" appealing to her daughter who had
LINE 18: come out to the steps.
LINE 19: "She certainly did, Miss Cuthbert," corroborated Flora Jane earnestly.
LINE 20: "I'm dreadful sorry," said Mrs. Spencer. "It's too bad; but it certainly
LINE 21: wasn't my fault, you see, Miss Cuthbert. I did the best I could and I
LINE 22: thought I was following your instructions. Nancy is a terrible flighty
LINE 23: thing. I've often had to scold her well for her heedlessness."
LINE 24: "It was our own fault," said Marilla resignedly. "We should have come
LINE 25: to you ourselves and not left an important message to be passed along by
LINE 26: word of mouth in that fashion. Anyhow, the mistake has been made and the
LINE 27: only thing to do is to set it right. Can we send the child back to the
LINE 28: asylum? I suppose they'll take her back, won't they?"
LINE 29: "I suppose so," said Mrs. Spencer thoughtfully, "but I don't think
LINE 30: it will be necessary to send her back. Mrs. Peter Blewett was up here
LINE 31: yesterday, and she was saying to me how much she wished she'd sent by me
LINE 32: for a little girl to help her. Mrs. Peter has a large family, you know,
LINE 33: and she finds it hard to get help. Anne will be the very girl for you. I
LINE 34: call it positively providential."
LINE 35: Marilla did not look as if she thought Providence had much to do with
LINE 36: the matter. Here was an unexpectedly good chance to get this unwelcome
LINE 37: orphan off her hands, and she did not even feel grateful for it.
LINE 38: She knew Mrs. Peter Blewett only by sight as a small, shrewish-faced
LINE 39: woman without an ounce of superfluous flesh on her bones. But she had
LINE 40: heard of her. "A terrible worker and driver," Mrs. Peter was said to
LINE 41: be; and discharged servant girls told fearsome tales of her temper and
LINE 42: stinginess, and her family of pert, quarrelsome children. Marilla felt
LINE 43: a qualm of conscience at the thought of handing Anne over to her tender
LINE 44: mercies.
LINE 45: "Well, I'll go in and we'll talk the matter over," she said.
LINE 46: "And if there isn't Mrs. Peter coming up the lane this blessed minute!"
LINE 47: exclaimed Mrs. Spencer, bustling her guests through the hall into the
LINE 48: parlor, where a deadly chill struck on them as if the air had been
LINE 49: strained so long through dark green, closely drawn blinds that it had
LINE 50: lost every particle of warmth it had ever possessed. "That is real
LINE 51: lucky, for we can settle the matter right away. Take the armchair, Miss
LINE 52: Cuthbert. Anne, you sit here on the ottoman and don't wiggle. Let
LINE 53: me take your hats. Flora Jane, go out and put the kettle on. Good
LINE 54: afternoon, Mrs. Blewett. We were just saying how fortunate it was you
LINE 55: happened along. Let me introduce you two ladies. Mrs. Blewett, Miss
LINE 56: Cuthbert. Please excuse me for just a moment. I forgot to tell Flora
LINE 57: Jane to take the buns out of the oven."
LINE 58: Mrs. Spencer whisked away, after pulling up the blinds. Anne sitting
LINE 59: mutely on the ottoman, with her hands clasped tightly in her lap, stared
LINE 60: at Mrs Blewett as one fascinated. Was she to be given into the keeping
LINE 61: of this sharp-faced, sharp-eyed woman? She felt a lump coming up in her
LINE 62: throat and her eyes smarted painfully. She was beginning to be afraid
LINE 63: she couldn't keep the tears back when Mrs. Spencer returned, flushed
LINE 64: and beaming, quite capable of taking any and every difficulty, physical,
LINE 65: mental or spiritual, into consideration and settling it out of hand.
LINE 66: "It seems there's been a mistake about this little girl, Mrs. Blewett,"
LINE 67: she said. "I was under the impression that Mr. and Miss Cuthbert wanted
LINE 68: a little girl to adopt. I was certainly told so. But it seems it was a
LINE 69: boy they wanted. So if you're still of the same mind you were yesterday,
LINE 70: I think she'll be just the thing for you."
LINE 71: Mrs. Blewett darted her eyes over Anne from head to foot.
LINE 72: "How old are you and what's your name?" she demanded.
LINE 73: "Anne Shirley," faltered the shrinking child, not daring to make any
LINE 74: stipulations regarding the spelling thereof, "and I'm eleven years old."
LINE 75: "Humph! You don't look as if there was much to you. But you're wiry. I
LINE 76: don't know but the wiry ones are the best after all. Well, if I take you
LINE 77: you'll have to be a good girl, you know--good and smart and respectful.
LINE 78: I'll expect you to earn your keep, and no mistake about that. Yes, I
LINE 79: suppose I might as well take her off your hands, Miss Cuthbert. The
LINE 80: baby's awful fractious, and I'm clean worn out attending to him. If you
LINE 81: like I can take her right home now."
LINE 82: Marilla looked at Anne and softened at sight of the child's pale face
LINE 83: with its look of mute misery--the misery of a helpless little creature
LINE 84: who finds itself once more caught in the trap from which it had escaped.
LINE 85: Marilla felt an uncomfortable conviction that, if she denied the appeal
LINE 86: of that look, it would haunt her to her dying day. More-over, she did
LINE 87: not fancy Mrs. Blewett. To hand a sensitive, "highstrung" child over to
LINE 88: such a woman! No, she could not take the responsibility of doing that!
LINE 89: "Well, I don't know," she said slowly. "I didn't say that Matthew and I
LINE 90: had absolutely decided that we wouldn't keep her. In fact I may say that
LINE 91: Matthew is disposed to keep her. I just came over to find out how the
LINE 92: mistake had occurred. I think I'd better take her home again and talk it
LINE 93: over with Matthew. I feel that I oughtn't to decide on anything without
LINE 94: consulting him. If we make up our mind not to keep her we'll bring or
LINE 95: send her over to you tomorrow night. If we don't you may know that she
LINE 96: is going to stay with us. Will that suit you, Mrs. Blewett?"
LINE 97: "I suppose it'll have to," said Mrs. Blewett ungraciously.
LINE 98: During Marilla's speech a sunrise had been dawning on Anne's face. First
LINE 99: the look of despair faded out; then came a faint flush of hope;
LINE 100: her eyes grew deep and bright as morning stars. The child was quite
LINE 101: transfigured; and, a moment later, when Mrs. Spencer and Mrs. Blewett
LINE 102: went out in quest of a recipe the latter had come to borrow she sprang
LINE 103: up and flew across the room to Marilla.
LINE 104: "Oh, Miss Cuthbert, did you really say that perhaps you would let me
LINE 105: stay at Green Gables?" she said, in a breathless whisper, as if speaking
LINE 106: aloud might shatter the glorious possibility. "Did you really say it? Or
LINE 107: did I only imagine that you did?"
LINE 108: "I think you'd better learn to control that imagination of yours, Anne,
LINE 109: if you can't distinguish between what is real and what isn't," said
LINE 110: Marilla crossly. "Yes, you did hear me say just that and no more. It
LINE 111: isn't decided yet and perhaps we will conclude to let Mrs. Blewett take
LINE 112: you after all. She certainly needs you much more than I do."
LINE 113: "I'd rather go back to the asylum than go to live with her," said Anne
LINE 114: passionately. "She looks exactly like a--like a gimlet."
LINE 115: Marilla smothered a smile under the conviction that Anne must be
LINE 116: reproved for such a speech.
LINE 117: "A little girl like you should be ashamed of talking so about a lady and
LINE 118: a stranger," she said severely. "Go back and sit down quietly and hold
LINE 119: your tongue and behave as a good girl should."
LINE 120: "I'll try to do and be anything you want me, if you'll only keep me,"
LINE 121: said Anne, returning meekly to her ottoman.
LINE 122: When they arrived back at Green Gables that evening Matthew met them in
LINE 123: the lane. Marilla from afar had noted him prowling along it and guessed
LINE 124: his motive. She was prepared for the relief she read in his face when he
LINE 125: saw that she had at least brought back Anne back with her. But she said
LINE 126: nothing, to him, relative to the affair, until they were both out in the
LINE 127: yard behind the barn milking the cows. Then she briefly told him Anne's
LINE 128: history and the result of the interview with Mrs. Spencer.
LINE 129: "I wouldn't give a dog I liked to that Blewett woman," said Matthew with
LINE 130: unusual vim.
LINE 131: "I don't fancy her style myself," admitted Marilla, "but it's that
LINE 132: or keeping her ourselves, Matthew. And since you seem to want her, I
LINE 133: suppose I'm willing--or have to be. I've been thinking over the idea
LINE 134: until I've got kind of used to it. It seems a sort of duty. I've never
LINE 135: brought up a child, especially a girl, and I dare say I'll make a
LINE 136: terrible mess of it. But I'll do my best. So far as I'm concerned,
LINE 137: Matthew, she may stay."
LINE 138: Matthew's shy face was a glow of delight.
LINE 139: "Well now, I reckoned you'd come to see it in that light, Marilla," he
LINE 140: said. "She's such an interesting little thing."
LINE 141: "It'd be more to the point if you could say she was a useful little
LINE 142: thing," retorted Marilla, "but I'll make it my business to see she's
LINE 143: trained to be that. And mind, Matthew, you're not to go interfering with
LINE 144: my methods. Perhaps an old maid doesn't know much about bringing up
LINE 145: a child, but I guess she knows more than an old bachelor. So you just
LINE 146: leave me to manage her. When I fail it'll be time enough to put your oar
LINE 147: in."
LINE 148: "There, there, Marilla, you can have your own way," said Matthew
LINE 149: reassuringly. "Only be as good and kind to her as you can without
LINE 150: spoiling her. I kind of think she's one of the sort you can do anything
LINE 151: with if you only get her to love you."
LINE 152: Marilla sniffed, to express her contempt for Matthew's opinions
LINE 153: concerning anything feminine, and walked off to the dairy with the
LINE 154: pails.
LINE 155: "I won't tell her tonight that she can stay," she reflected, as she
LINE 156: strained the milk into the creamers. "She'd be so excited that she
LINE 157: wouldn't sleep a wink. Marilla Cuthbert, you're fairly in for it. Did
LINE 158: you ever suppose you'd see the day when you'd be adopting an orphan
LINE 159: girl? It's surprising enough; but not so surprising as that Matthew
LINE 160: should be at the bottom of it, him that always seemed to have such a
LINE 161: mortal dread of little girls. Anyhow, we've decided on the experiment
LINE 162: and goodness only knows what will come of it."