LINE 1: January 10th, 1827.—While writing the above, yesterday evening, I sat
LINE 2: in the drawing-room. Mr. Huntingdon was present, but, as I thought,
LINE 3: asleep on the sofa behind me. He had risen, however, unknown to me,
LINE 4: and, actuated by some base spirit of curiosity, been looking over my
LINE 5: shoulder for I know not how long; for when I had laid aside my pen, and
LINE 6: was about to close the book, he suddenly placed his hand upon it, and
LINE 7: saying,—"With your leave, my dear, I'll have a look at this," forcibly
LINE 8: wrested it from me, and, drawing a chair to the table, composedly sat
LINE 9: down to examine it: turning back leaf after leaf to find an explanation
LINE 10: of what he had read. Unluckily for me, he was more sober that night
LINE 11: than he usually is at such an hour.
LINE 12: Of course I did not leave him to pursue this occupation in quiet: I
LINE 13: made several attempts to snatch the book from his hands, but he held it
LINE 14: too firmly for that; I upbraided him in bitterness and scorn for his
LINE 15: mean and dishonourable conduct, but that had no effect upon him; and,
LINE 16: finally, I extinguished both the candles, but he only wheeled round to
LINE 17: the fire, and raising a blaze sufficient for his purposes, calmly
LINE 18: continued the investigation. I had serious thoughts of getting a
LINE 19: pitcher of water and extinguishing that light too; but it was evident
LINE 20: his curiosity was too keenly excited to be quenched by that, and the
LINE 21: more I manifested my anxiety to baffle his scrutiny, the greater would
LINE 22: be his determination to persist in it, besides it was too late.
LINE 23: "It seems very interesting, love," said he, lifting his head and
LINE 24: turning to where I stood, wringing my hands in silent rage and anguish;
LINE 25: "but it's rather long; I'll look at it some other time; and meanwhile
LINE 26: I'll trouble you for your keys, my dear."
LINE 27: "What keys?"
LINE 28: "The keys of your cabinet, desk, drawers, and whatever else you
LINE 29: possess," said he, rising and holding out his hand.
LINE 30: "I've not got them," I replied. The key of my desk, in fact, was at
LINE 31: that moment in the lock, and the others were attached to it.
LINE 32: "Then you must send for them," said he; "and if that old devil, Rachel,
LINE 33: doesn't immediately deliver them up, she tramps bag and baggage
LINE 34: tomorrow."
LINE 35: "She doesn't know where they are," I answered, quietly placing my hand
LINE 36: upon them, and taking them from the desk, as I thought, unobserved.
LINE 37: "_I_ know, but I shall not give them up without a reason."
LINE 38: "And _I_ know, too," said he, suddenly seizing my closed hand and
LINE 39: rudely abstracting them from it. He then took up one of the candles and
LINE 40: relighted it by thrusting it into the fire.
LINE 41: "Now, then," sneered he, "we must have a confiscation of property. But,
LINE 42: first, let us take a peep into the studio."
LINE 43: And putting the keys into his pocket, he walked into the library. I
LINE 44: followed, whether with the dim idea of preventing mischief, or only to
LINE 45: know the worst, I can hardly tell. My painting materials were laid
LINE 46: together on the corner table, ready for to-morrow's use, and only
LINE 47: covered with a cloth. He soon spied them out, and putting down the
LINE 48: candle, deliberately proceeded to cast them into the fire: palette,
LINE 49: paints, bladders, pencils, brushes, varnish: I saw them all consumed:
LINE 50: the palette-knives snapped in two, the oil and turpentine sent hissing
LINE 51: and roaring up the chimney. He then rang the bell.
LINE 52: "Benson, take those things away," said he, pointing to the easel,
LINE 53: canvas, and stretcher; "and tell the housemaid she may kindle the fire
LINE 54: with them: your mistress won't want them any more."
LINE 55: Benson paused aghast and looked at me.
LINE 56: "Take them away, Benson," said I; and his master muttered an oath.
LINE 57: "And this and all, sir?" said the astonished servant, referring to the
LINE 58: half-finished picture.
LINE 59: "That and all," replied the master; and the things were cleared away.
LINE 60: Mr. Huntingdon then went up-stairs. I did not attempt to follow him,
LINE 61: but remained seated in the arm-chair, speechless, tearless, and almost
LINE 62: motionless, till he returned about half-an-hour after, and walking up
LINE 63: to me, held the candle in my face and peered into my eyes with looks
LINE 64: and laughter too insulting to be borne. With a sudden stroke of my hand
LINE 65: I dashed the candle to the floor.
LINE 66: "Hal-lo!" muttered he, starting back; "she's the very devil for spite.
LINE 67: Did _ever_ any mortal see such eyes?—they shine in the dark like a
LINE 68: cat's. _Oh_, you're a sweet one!" So saying, he gathered up the candle
LINE 69: and the candlestick. The former being broken as well as extinguished,
LINE 70: he rang for another.
LINE 71: "Benson, your mistress has broken the candle; bring another."
LINE 72: "You expose yourself finely," observed I, as the man departed.
LINE 73: "I didn't say _I'd_ broken it, did I?" returned he. He then threw my
LINE 74: keys into my lap, saying,—"There! you'll find nothing gone but your
LINE 75: money, and the jewels, and a few little trifles I thought it advisable
LINE 76: to take into my own possession, lest your mercantile spirit should be
LINE 77: tempted to turn them into gold. I've left you a few sovereigns in your
LINE 78: purse, which I expect to last you through the month; at all events,
LINE 79: when you want more you will be so good as to give me an account of how
LINE 80: that's spent. I shall put you upon a small monthly allowance, in
LINE 81: future, for your own private expenses; and you needn't trouble yourself
LINE 82: any more about my concerns; I shall look out for a steward, my dear—I
LINE 83: won't expose you to the temptation. And as for the household matters,
LINE 84: Mrs. Greaves must be very particular in keeping her accounts; we must
LINE 85: go upon an entirely new plan—"
LINE 86: "What great discovery have you made now, Mr. Huntingdon? Have I
LINE 87: attempted to defraud you?"
LINE 88: "Not in money matters, exactly, it seems; but it's best to keep out of
LINE 89: the way of temptation."
LINE 90: Here Benson entered with the candles, and there followed a brief
LINE 91: interval of silence; I sitting still in my chair, and he standing with
LINE 92: his back to the fire, silently triumphing in my despair.
LINE 93: "And so," said he at length, "you thought to disgrace me, did you, by
LINE 94: running away and turning artist, and supporting yourself by the labour
LINE 95: of your hands, forsooth? And you thought to rob me of my son, too, and
LINE 96: bring him up to be a dirty Yankee tradesman, or a low, beggarly
LINE 97: painter?"
LINE 98: "Yes, to obviate his becoming such a gentleman as his father."
LINE 99: "It's well you couldn't keep your own secret—ha, ha! It's well these
LINE 100: women must be blabbing. If they haven't a friend to talk to, they must
LINE 101: whisper their secrets to the fishes, or write them on the sand, or
LINE 102: something; and it's well, too, I wasn't over full to-night, now I think
LINE 103: of it, or I might have snoozed away and never dreamt of looking what my
LINE 104: sweet lady was about; or I might have lacked the sense or the power to
LINE 105: carry my point like a man, as I have done."
LINE 106: Leaving him to his self-congratulations, I rose to secure my
LINE 107: manuscript, for I now remembered it had been left upon the drawing-room
LINE 108: table, and I determined, if possible, to save myself the humiliation of
LINE 109: seeing it in his hands again. I could not bear the idea of his amusing
LINE 110: himself over my secret thoughts and recollections; though, to be sure,
LINE 111: he would find little good of himself therein indited, except in the
LINE 112: former part; and oh, I would sooner burn it all than he should read
LINE 113: what I had written when I was such a fool as to love him!
LINE 114: "And by-the-by," cried he, as I was leaving the room, "you'd better
LINE 115: tell that d—d old sneak of a nurse to keep out of my way for a day or
LINE 116: two; I'd pay her her wages and send her packing to-morrow, but I know
LINE 117: she'd do more mischief out of the house than in it."
LINE 118: And as I departed, he went on cursing and abusing my faithful friend
LINE 119: and servant with epithets I will not defile this paper with repeating.
LINE 120: I went to her as soon as I had put away my book, and told her how our
LINE 121: project was defeated. She was as much distressed and horrified as I
LINE 122: was—and more so than I was that night, for I was partly stunned by the
LINE 123: blow, and partly excited and supported against it by the bitterness of
LINE 124: my wrath. But in the morning, when I woke without that cheering hope
LINE 125: that had been my secret comfort and support so long, and all this day,
LINE 126: when I have wandered about restless and objectless, shunning my
LINE 127: husband, shrinking even from my child, knowing that I am unfit to be
LINE 128: his teacher or companion, hoping nothing for his future life, and
LINE 129: fervently wishing he had never been born,—I felt the full extent of my
LINE 130: calamity, and I feel it now. I know that day after day such feelings
LINE 131: will return upon me. I am a slave—a prisoner—but that is nothing; if it
LINE 132: were myself alone I would not complain, but I am forbidden to rescue my
LINE 133: son from ruin, and what was once my only consolation is become the
LINE 134: crowning source of my despair.
LINE 135: Have I no faith in God? I try to look to Him and raise my heart to
LINE 136: heaven, but it will cleave to the dust. I can only say, "He hath hedged
LINE 137: me about, that I cannot get out: He hath made my chain heavy. He hath
LINE 138: filled me with bitterness—He hath made me drunken with wormwood." I
LINE 139: forget to add, "But though He cause grief, yet will He have compassion
LINE 140: according to the multitude of His mercies. For He doth not afflict
LINE 141: willingly nor grieve the children of men." I ought to think of this;
LINE 142: and if there be nothing but sorrow for me in this world, what is the
LINE 143: longest life of misery to a whole eternity of peace? And for my little
LINE 144: Arthur—has he no friend but me? Who was it said, "It is not the will of
LINE 145: your Father which is in heaven that one of these little ones should
LINE 146: perish?"