LINE 1: October 1st.—All is settled now. My father has given his consent, and
LINE 2: the time is fixed for Christmas, by a sort of compromise between the
LINE 3: respective advocates for hurry and delay. Milicent Hargrave is to be
LINE 4: one bridesmaid and Annabella Wilmot the other—not that I am
LINE 5: particularly fond of the latter, but she is an intimate of the family,
LINE 6: and I have not another friend.
LINE 7: When I told Milicent of my engagement, she rather provoked me by her
LINE 8: manner of taking it. After staring a moment in mute surprise, she
LINE 9: said,—
LINE 10: "Well, Helen, I suppose I ought to congratulate you—and I _am_ glad to
LINE 11: see you so happy; but I did not think you would take him; and I can't
LINE 12: help feeling surprised that you should like him so much."
LINE 13: "Why so?"
LINE 14: "Because you are so superior to him in every way, and there's something
LINE 15: so bold and reckless about him—so, I don't know how—but I always feel a
LINE 16: wish to get out of his way when I see him approach."
LINE 17: "You are timid, Milicent; but that's no fault of his."
LINE 18: "And then his look," continued she. "People say he's handsome, and of
LINE 19: course he is; but _I_ don't _like_ that kind of beauty, and I wonder
LINE 20: that you should."
LINE 21: "Why so, pray?"
LINE 22: "Well, you know, I think there's nothing noble or lofty in his
LINE 23: appearance."
LINE 24: "In fact, you wonder that I can like any one so unlike the stilted
LINE 25: heroes of romance. Well, give me my flesh and blood lover, and I'll
LINE 26: leave all the Sir Herberts and Valentines to you—if you can find them."
LINE 27: "I don't want them," said she. "I'll be satisfied with flesh and blood
LINE 28: too—only the spirit must shine through and predominate. But don't you
LINE 29: think Mr. Huntingdon's face is too red?"
LINE 30: "No!" cried I, indignantly. "It is not red at all. There is just a
LINE 31: pleasant glow, a healthy freshness in his complexion—the warm, pinky
LINE 32: tint of the whole harmonising with the deeper colour of the cheeks,
LINE 33: exactly as it ought to do. I hate a man to be red and white, like a
LINE 34: painted doll, or all sickly white, or smoky black, or cadaverous
LINE 35: yellow."
LINE 36: "Well, tastes differ—but _I_ like pale or dark," replied she. "But, to
LINE 37: tell you the truth, Helen, I had been deluding myself with the hope
LINE 38: that you would one day be my sister. I expected Walter would be
LINE 39: introduced to you next season; and I thought you would like him, and
LINE 40: was certain he would like you; and I flattered myself I should thus
LINE 41: have the felicity of seeing the two persons I like best in the
LINE 42: world—except mamma—united in one. He mayn't be exactly what you would
LINE 43: call handsome, but he's far more distinguished-looking, and nicer and
LINE 44: better than Mr. Huntingdon;—and I'm sure you would say so, if you knew
LINE 45: him."
LINE 46: "Impossible, Milicent! You think so, because you're his sister; and, on
LINE 47: that account, I'll forgive you; but nobody else should so disparage
LINE 48: Arthur Huntingdon to me with impunity."
LINE 49: Miss Wilmot expressed her feelings on the subject almost as openly.
LINE 50: "And so, Helen," said she, coming up to me with a smile of no amiable
LINE 51: import, "you are to be Mrs. Huntingdon, I suppose?"
LINE 52: "Yes," replied I. "Don't you envy me?"
LINE 53: "Oh, _dear_, no!" she exclaimed. "I shall probably be Lady Lowborough
LINE 54: some day, and then you know, dear, I shall be in a capacity to inquire,
LINE 55: 'Don't you envy _me?_'"
LINE 56: "Henceforth I shall envy no one," returned I.
LINE 57: "Indeed! Are you so happy then?" said she, thoughtfully; and something
LINE 58: very like a cloud of disappointment shadowed her face. "And does he
LINE 59: love you—I mean, does he idolise you as much as you do him?" she added,
LINE 60: fixing her eyes upon me with ill-disguised anxiety for the reply.
LINE 61: "I don't want to be idolised," I answered; "but I am well assured that
LINE 62: he _loves_ me more than anybody else in the world—as I do him."
LINE 63: "Exactly," said she, with a nod. "I wish—" she paused.
LINE 64: "What do you wish?" asked I, annoyed at the vindictive expression of
LINE 65: her countenance.
LINE 66: "I wish," returned, she, with a short laugh, "that all the attractive
LINE 67: points and desirable qualifications of the two gentlemen were united in
LINE 68: one—that Lord Lowborough had Huntingdon's handsome face and good
LINE 69: temper, and all his wit, and mirth and charm, or else that Huntingdon
LINE 70: had Lowborough's pedigree, and title, and delightful old family seat,
LINE 71: and I had him; and you might have the other and welcome."
LINE 72: "Thank you, dear Annabella: I am better satisfied with things as they
LINE 73: are, for my own part; and for you, I wish you were as well content with
LINE 74: your intended as I am with mine," said I; and it was true enough; for,
LINE 75: though vexed at first at her unamiable spirit, her frankness touched
LINE 76: me, and the contrast between our situations was such, that I could well
LINE 77: afford to pity her and wish her well.
LINE 78: Mr. Huntingdon's acquaintances appear to be no better pleased with our
LINE 79: approaching union than mine. This morning's post brought him letters
LINE 80: from several of his friends, during the perusal of which, at the
LINE 81: breakfast-table, he excited the attention of the company by the
LINE 82: singular variety of his grimaces. But he crushed them all into his
LINE 83: pocket, with a private laugh, and said nothing till the meal was
LINE 84: concluded. Then, while the company were hanging over the fire or
LINE 85: loitering through the room, previous to settling to their various
LINE 86: morning avocations, he came and leant over the back of my chair, with
LINE 87: his face in contact with my curls, and commencing with a quiet little
LINE 88: kiss, poured forth the following complaints into my ear:—
LINE 89: "Helen, you witch, do you know that you've entailed upon me the curses
LINE 90: of all my friends? I wrote to them the other day, to tell them of my
LINE 91: happy prospects, and now, instead of a bundle of congratulations, I've
LINE 92: got a pocketful of bitter execrations and reproaches. There's not one
LINE 93: kind wish for me, or one good word for you, among them all. They say
LINE 94: there'll be no more fun now, no more merry days and glorious nights—and
LINE 95: all my fault—I am the first to break up the jovial band, and others, in
LINE 96: pure despair, will follow my example. I was the very life and prop of
LINE 97: the community, they do me the honour to say, and I have shamefully
LINE 98: betrayed my trust—"
LINE 99: "You may join them again, if you like," said I, somewhat piqued at the
LINE 100: sorrowful tone of his discourse. "I should be sorry to stand between
LINE 101: any man—or body of men, and so much happiness; and perhaps I can manage
LINE 102: to do without you, as well as your poor deserted friends."
LINE 103: "Bless you, no," murmured he. "It's 'all for love or the world well
LINE 104: lost,' with me. Let them go to—where they belong, to speak politely.
LINE 105: But if you saw how they abuse me, Helen, you would love me all the more
LINE 106: for having ventured so much for your sake."
LINE 107: He pulled out his crumpled letters. I thought he was going to show them
LINE 108: to me, and told him I did not wish to see them.
LINE 109: "I'm not going to show them to you, love," said he. "They're hardly fit
LINE 110: for a lady's eyes—the most part of them. But look here. This is
LINE 111: Grimsby's scrawl—only three lines, the sulky dog! He doesn't say much,
LINE 112: to be sure, but his very silence implies more than all the others'
LINE 113: words, and the less he says, the more he thinks—and this is Hargrave's
LINE 114: missive. He is particularly grieved at me, because, forsooth he had
LINE 115: fallen in love with you from his sister's reports, and meant to have
LINE 116: married you himself, as soon as he had sown his wild oats."
LINE 117: "I'm vastly obliged to him," observed I.
LINE 118: "And so am I," said he. "And look at this. This is Hattersley's—every
LINE 119: page stuffed full of railing accusations, bitter curses, and lamentable
LINE 120: complaints, ending up with swearing that he'll get married himself in
LINE 121: revenge: he'll throw himself away on the first old maid that chooses to
LINE 122: set her cap at him,—as if _I_ cared what he did with himself."
LINE 123: "Well," said I, "if you do give up your intimacy with these men, I
LINE 124: don't think you will have much cause to regret the loss of their
LINE 125: society; for it's my belief they never did you much good."
LINE 126: "Maybe not; but we'd a merry time of it, too, though mingled with
LINE 127: sorrow and pain, as Lowborough knows to his cost—Ha, ha!" and while he
LINE 128: was laughing at the recollection of Lowborough's troubles, my uncle
LINE 129: came and slapped him on the shoulder.
LINE 130: "Come, my lad!" said he. "Are you too busy making love to my niece to
LINE 131: make war with the pheasants?—First of October, remember! Sun shines
LINE 132: out—rain ceased—even Boarham's not afraid to venture in his waterproof
LINE 133: boots; and Wilmot and I are going to beat you all. I declare, we old
LINE 134: 'uns are the keenest sportsmen of the lot!"
LINE 135: "I'll show you what I can do to-day, however," said my companion. "I'll
LINE 136: murder your birds by wholesale, just for keeping me away from better
LINE 137: company than either you or them."
LINE 138: And so saying he departed; and I saw no more of him till dinner. It
LINE 139: seemed a weary time; I wonder what I shall do without him.
LINE 140: It is very true that the three elder gentlemen have proved themselves
LINE 141: much keener sportsmen than the two younger ones; for both Lord
LINE 142: Lowborough and Arthur Huntingdon have of late almost daily neglected
LINE 143: the shooting excursions to accompany us in our various rides and
LINE 144: rambles. But these merry times are fast drawing to a close. In less
LINE 145: than a fortnight the party break up, much to my sorrow, for every day I
LINE 146: enjoy it more and more—now that Messrs. Boarham and Wilmot have ceased
LINE 147: to tease me, and my aunt has ceased to lecture me, and I have ceased to
LINE 148: be jealous of Annabella—and even to dislike her—and now that Mr.
LINE 149: Huntingdon is become _my_ Arthur, and I may enjoy his society without
LINE 150: restraint. What _shall_ I do without him, I repeat?