LINE 1: Sept. 23rd.—Our guests arrived about three weeks ago. Lord and Lady
LINE 2: Lowborough have now been married above eight months; and I will do the
LINE 3: lady the credit to say that her husband is quite an altered man; his
LINE 4: looks, his spirits, and his temper, are all perceptibly changed for the
LINE 5: better since I last saw him. But there is room for improvement still.
LINE 6: He is not always cheerful, nor always contented, and she often
LINE 7: complains of his ill-humour, which, however, of all persons, _she_
LINE 8: ought to be the last to accuse him of, as he never displays it against
LINE 9: her, except for such conduct as would provoke a saint. He adores her
LINE 10: still, and would go to the world's end to please her. She knows her
LINE 11: power, and she uses it too; but well knowing that to wheedle and coax
LINE 12: is safer than to command, she judiciously tempers her despotism with
LINE 13: flattery and blandishments enough to make him deem himself a favoured
LINE 14: and a happy man.
LINE 15: But she has a way of tormenting him, in which I am a fellow-sufferer,
LINE 16: or might be, if I chose to regard myself as such. This is by openly,
LINE 17: but not too glaringly, coquetting with Mr. Huntingdon, who is quite
LINE 18: willing to be her partner in the game; but I don't care for it,
LINE 19: because, with him, I know there is nothing but personal vanity, and a
LINE 20: mischievous desire to excite my jealousy, and, perhaps, to torment his
LINE 21: friend; and she, no doubt, is actuated by much the same motives; only,
LINE 22: there is more of malice and less of playfulness in _her_ manœuvres. It
LINE 23: is obviously, therefore, my interest to disappoint them both, as far as
LINE 24: I am concerned, by preserving a cheerful, undisturbed serenity
LINE 25: throughout; and, accordingly, I endeavour to show the fullest
LINE 26: confidence in my husband, and the greatest indifference to the arts of
LINE 27: my attractive guest. I have never reproached the former but once, and
LINE 28: that was for laughing at Lord Lowborough's depressed and anxious
LINE 29: countenance one evening, when they had both been particularly
LINE 30: provoking; and then, indeed, I said a good deal on the subject, and
LINE 31: rebuked him sternly enough; but he only laughed, and said,—"You can
LINE 32: feel for him, Helen, can't you?"
LINE 33: "I can feel for anyone that is unjustly treated," I replied, "and I can
LINE 34: feel for those that injure them too."
LINE 35: "Why, Helen, you are as jealous as he is!" cried he, laughing still
LINE 36: more; and I found it impossible to convince him of his mistake. So,
LINE 37: from that time, I have carefully refrained from any notice of the
LINE 38: subject whatever, and left Lord Lowborough to take care of himself. He
LINE 39: either has not the sense or the power to follow my example, though he
LINE 40: does try to conceal his uneasiness as well as he can; but still, it
LINE 41: will appear in his face, and his ill-humour will peep out at intervals,
LINE 42: though not in the expression of open resentment—they never go far
LINE 43: enough for that. But I confess I do feel jealous at times, most
LINE 44: painfully, bitterly so; when she sings and plays to him, and he hangs
LINE 45: over the instrument, and dwells upon her voice with no affected
LINE 46: interest; for then I know he is really delighted, and I have no power
LINE 47: to awaken similar fervour. I can amuse and please him with my simple
LINE 48: songs, but not delight him thus.
LINE 49: 28th.—Yesterday, we all went to the Grove, Mr. Hargrave's
LINE 50: much-neglected home. His mother frequently asks us over, that she may
LINE 51: have the pleasure of her dear Walter's company; and this time she had
LINE 52: invited us to a dinner-party, and got together as many of the country
LINE 53: gentry as were within reach to meet us. The entertainment was very well
LINE 54: got up; but I could not help thinking about the cost of it all the
LINE 55: time. I don't like Mrs. Hargrave; she is a hard, pretentious,
LINE 56: worldly-minded woman. She has money enough to live very comfortably, if
LINE 57: she only knew how to use it judiciously, and had taught her son to do
LINE 58: the same; but she is ever straining to keep up appearances, with that
LINE 59: despicable pride that shuns the semblance of poverty as of a shameful
LINE 60: crime. She grinds her dependents, pinches her servants, and deprives
LINE 61: even her daughters and herself of the real comforts of life, because
LINE 62: she will not consent to yield the palm in outward show to those who
LINE 63: have three times her wealth; and, above all, because she is determined
LINE 64: her cherished son shall be enabled to "hold up his head with the
LINE 65: highest gentlemen in the land." This same son, I imagine, is a man of
LINE 66: expensive habits, no reckless spendthrift and no abandoned sensualist,
LINE 67: but one who likes to have "everything handsome about him," and to go to
LINE 68: a certain length in youthful indulgences, not so much to gratify his
LINE 69: own tastes as to maintain his reputation as a man of fashion in the
LINE 70: world, and a respectable fellow among his own lawless companions; while
LINE 71: he is too selfish to consider how many comforts might be obtained for
LINE 72: his fond mother and sisters with the money he thus wastes upon himself:
LINE 73: as long as they can contrive to make a respectable appearance once a
LINE 74: year, when they come to town, he gives himself little concern about
LINE 75: their private stintings and struggles at home. This is a harsh judgment
LINE 76: to form of "dear, noble-minded, generous-hearted Walter," but I fear it
LINE 77: is too just.
LINE 78: Mrs. Hargrave's anxiety to make good matches for her daughters is
LINE 79: partly the cause, and partly the result, of these errors: by making a
LINE 80: figure in the world, and showing them off to advantage, she hopes to
LINE 81: obtain better chances for them; and by thus living beyond her
LINE 82: legitimate means, and lavishing so much on their brother, she renders
LINE 83: them portionless, and makes them burdens on her hands. Poor Milicent, I
LINE 84: fear, has already fallen a sacrifice to the manœuvrings of this
LINE 85: mistaken mother, who congratulates herself on having so satisfactorily
LINE 86: discharged her maternal duty, and hopes to do as well for Esther. But
LINE 87: Esther is a child as yet, a little merry romp of fourteen: as
LINE 88: honest-hearted, and as guileless and simple as her sister, but with a
LINE 89: fearless spirit of her own, that I fancy her mother will find some
LINE 90: difficulty in bending to her purposes.