LINE 1: December 25th.—Last Christmas I was a bride, with a heart overflowing
LINE 2: with present bliss, and full of ardent hopes for the future, though not
LINE 3: unmingled with foreboding fears. Now I am a wife: my bliss is sobered,
LINE 4: but not destroyed; my hopes diminished, but not departed; my fears
LINE 5: increased, but not yet thoroughly confirmed; and, thank heaven, I am a
LINE 6: mother too. God has sent me a soul to educate for heaven, and give me a
LINE 7: new and calmer bliss, and stronger hopes to comfort me.
LINE 8: Dec. 25th, 1823.—Another year is gone. My little Arthur lives and
LINE 9: thrives. He is healthy, but not robust, full of gentle playfulness and
LINE 10: vivacity, already affectionate, and susceptible of passions and
LINE 11: emotions it will be long ere he can find words to express. He has won
LINE 12: his father's heart at last; and now my constant terror is, lest he
LINE 13: should be ruined by that father's thoughtless indulgence. But I must
LINE 14: beware of my own weakness too, for I never knew till now how strong are
LINE 15: a parent's temptations to spoil an only child.
LINE 16: I have need of consolation in my son, for (to this silent paper I may
LINE 17: confess it) I have but little in my husband. I love him still; and he
LINE 18: loves me, in his own way—but oh, how different from the love I could
LINE 19: have given, and once had hoped to receive! How little real sympathy
LINE 20: there exists between us; how many of my thoughts and feelings are
LINE 21: gloomily cloistered within my own mind; how much of my higher and
LINE 22: better self is indeed unmarried—doomed either to harden and sour in the
LINE 23: sunless shade of solitude, or to quite degenerate and fall away for
LINE 24: lack of nutriment in this unwholesome soil! But, I repeat, I have no
LINE 25: right to complain; only let me state the truth—some of the truth, at
LINE 26: least,—and see hereafter if any darker truths will blot these pages. We
LINE 27: have now been full two years united; the "romance" of our attachment
LINE 28: must be worn away. Surely I have now got down to the lowest gradation
LINE 29: in Arthur's affection, and discovered all the evils of his nature: if
LINE 30: there be any further change, it must be for the better, as we become
LINE 31: still more accustomed to each other; surely we shall find no lower
LINE 32: depth than this. And, if so, I can bear it well—as well, at least, as I
LINE 33: have borne it hitherto.
LINE 34: Arthur is not what is commonly called a _bad_ man: he has many good
LINE 35: qualities; but he is a man without self-restraint or lofty aspirations,
LINE 36: a lover of pleasure, given up to animal enjoyments: he is not a bad
LINE 37: husband, but his notions of matrimonial duties and comforts are not my
LINE 38: notions. Judging from appearances, his idea of a wife is a thing to
LINE 39: love one devotedly, and to stay at home to wait upon her husband, and
LINE 40: amuse him and minister to his comfort in every possible way, while he
LINE 41: chooses to stay with her; and, when he is absent, to attend to his
LINE 42: interests, domestic or otherwise, and patiently wait his return, no
LINE 43: matter how he may be occupied in the meantime.
LINE 44: Early in spring he announced his intention of going to London: his
LINE 45: affairs there demanded his attendance, he said, and he could refuse it
LINE 46: no longer. He expressed his regret at having to leave me, but hoped I
LINE 47: would amuse myself with the baby till he returned.
LINE 48: "But why leave me?" I said. "I can go with you: I can be ready at any
LINE 49: time."
LINE 50: "You would not take that child to town?"
LINE 51: "Yes; why not?"
LINE 52: The thing was absurd: the air of the town would be certain to disagree
LINE 53: with him, and with me as a nurse; the late hours and London habits
LINE 54: would not suit me under such circumstances; and altogether he assured
LINE 55: me that it would be excessively troublesome, injurious, and unsafe. I
LINE 56: over-ruled his objections as well as I could, for I trembled at the
LINE 57: thoughts of his going alone, and would sacrifice almost anything for
LINE 58: myself, much even for my child, to prevent it; but at length he told
LINE 59: me, plainly, and somewhat testily, that he could not do with me: he was
LINE 60: worn out with the baby's restless nights, and must have some repose. I
LINE 61: proposed separate apartments; but it would not do.
LINE 62: "The truth is, Arthur," I said at last, "you are weary of my company,
LINE 63: and determined not to have me with you. You might as well have said so
LINE 64: at once."
LINE 65: He denied it; but I immediately left the room, and flew to the nursery,
LINE 66: to hide my feelings, if I could not soothe them, there.
LINE 67: I was too much hurt to express any further dissatisfaction with his
LINE 68: plans, or at all to refer to the subject again, except for the
LINE 69: necessary arrangements concerning his departure and the conduct of
LINE 70: affairs during his absence, till the day before he went, when I
LINE 71: earnestly exhorted him to take care of himself and keep out of the way
LINE 72: of temptation. He laughed at my anxiety, but assured me there was no
LINE 73: cause for it, and promised to attend to my advice.
LINE 74: "I suppose it is no use asking you to fix a day for your return?" said
LINE 75: I.
LINE 76: "Why, no; I hardly can, under the circumstances; but be assured, love,
LINE 77: I shall not be long away."
LINE 78: "I don't wish to keep you a prisoner at home," I replied; "I should not
LINE 79: grumble at your staying whole months away—if you can be happy so long
LINE 80: without me—provided I knew you were safe; but I don't like the idea of
LINE 81: your being there among your friends, as you call them."
LINE 82: "Pooh, pooh, you silly girl! Do you think I can't take care of myself?"
LINE 83: "You didn't last time. But THIS time, Arthur," I added, earnestly,
LINE 84: "show me that you can, and teach me that I need not fear to trust you!"
LINE 85: He promised fair, but in such a manner as we seek to soothe a child.
LINE 86: And did he keep his promise? No; and henceforth _I can never trust his
LINE 87: word_. Bitter, bitter confession! Tears blind me while I write. It was
LINE 88: early in March that he went, and he did not return till July. This time
LINE 89: he did not trouble himself to make excuses as before, and his letters
LINE 90: were less frequent, and shorter and less affectionate, especially after
LINE 91: the first few weeks: they came slower and slower, and more terse and
LINE 92: careless every time. But still, when _I_ omitted writing, he complained
LINE 93: of my neglect. When I wrote sternly and coldly, as I confess I
LINE 94: frequently did at the last, he blamed my harshness, and said it was
LINE 95: enough to scare him from his home: when I tried mild persuasion, he was
LINE 96: a little more gentle in his replies, and promised to return; but I had
LINE 97: learnt, at last, to disregard his promises.