LINE 1: It was about the close of the month, that, yielding at length to the
LINE 2: urgent importunities of Rose, I accompanied her in a visit to Wildfell
LINE 3: Hall. To our surprise, we were ushered into a room where the first
LINE 4: object that met the eye was a painter's easel, with a table beside it
LINE 5: covered with rolls of canvas, bottles of oil and varnish, palette,
LINE 6: brushes, paints, &c. Leaning against the wall were several sketches in
LINE 7: various stages of progression, and a few finished paintings—mostly of
LINE 8: landscapes and figures.
LINE 9: "I must make you welcome to my studio," said Mrs. Graham; "there is no
LINE 10: fire in the sitting-room to-day, and it is rather too cold to show you
LINE 11: into a place with an empty grate."
LINE 12: And disengaging a couple of chairs from the artistical lumber that
LINE 13: usurped them, she bid us be seated, and resumed her place beside the
LINE 14: easel—not facing it exactly, but now and then glancing at the picture
LINE 15: upon it while she conversed, and giving it an occasional touch with her
LINE 16: brush, as if she found it impossible to wean her attention entirely
LINE 17: from her occupation to fix it upon her guests. It was a view of
LINE 18: Wildfell Hall, as seen at early morning from the field below, rising in
LINE 19: dark relief against a sky of clear silvery blue, with a few red streaks
LINE 20: on the horizon, faithfully drawn and coloured, and very elegantly and
LINE 21: artistically handled.
LINE 22: "I see your heart is in your work, Mrs. Graham," observed I: "I must
LINE 23: beg you to go on with it; for if you suffer our presence to interrupt
LINE 24: you, we shall be constrained to regard ourselves as unwelcome
LINE 25: intruders."
LINE 26: "Oh, no!" replied she, throwing her brush on to the table, as if
LINE 27: startled into politeness. "I am not so beset with visitors but that I
LINE 28: can readily spare a few minutes to the few that do favour me with their
LINE 29: company."
LINE 30: "You have almost completed your painting," said I, approaching to
LINE 31: observe it more closely, and surveying it with a greater degree of
LINE 32: admiration and delight than I cared to express. "A few more touches in
LINE 33: the foreground will finish it, I should think. But why have you called
LINE 34: it Fernley Manor, Cumberland, instead of Wildfell Hall, ——shire?" I
LINE 35: asked, alluding to the name she had traced in small characters at the
LINE 36: bottom of the canvas.
LINE 37: But immediately I was sensible of having committed an act of
LINE 38: impertinence in so doing; for she coloured and hesitated; but after a
LINE 39: moment's pause, with a kind of desperate frankness, she replied:—
LINE 40: "Because I have friends—acquaintances at least—in the world, from whom
LINE 41: I desire my present abode to be concealed; and as they might see the
LINE 42: picture, and might possibly recognise the style in spite of the false
LINE 43: initials I have put in the corner, I take the precaution to give a
LINE 44: false name to the place also, in order to put them on a wrong scent, if
LINE 45: they should attempt to trace me out by it."
LINE 46: "Then you don't intend to keep the picture?" said I, anxious to say
LINE 47: anything to change the subject.
LINE 48: "No; I cannot afford to paint for my own amusement."
LINE 49: "Mamma sends all her pictures to London," said Arthur; "and somebody
LINE 50: sells them for her there, and sends us the money."
LINE 51: In looking round upon the other pieces, I remarked a pretty sketch of
LINE 52: Lindenhope from the top of the hill; another view of the old hall
LINE 53: basking in the sunny haze of a quiet summer afternoon; and a simple but
LINE 54: striking little picture of a child brooding, with looks of silent but
LINE 55: deep and sorrowful regret, over a handful of withered flowers, with
LINE 56: glimpses of dark low hills and autumnal fields behind it, and a dull
LINE 57: beclouded sky above.
LINE 58: "You see there is a sad dearth of subjects," observed the fair artist.
LINE 59: "I took the old hall once on a moonlight night, and I suppose I must
LINE 60: take it again on a snowy winter's day, and then again on a dark cloudy
LINE 61: evening; for I really have nothing else to paint. I have been told that
LINE 62: you have a fine view of the sea somewhere in the neighbourhood. Is it
LINE 63: true?—and is it within walking distance?"
LINE 64: "Yes, if you don't object to walking four miles—or nearly so—little
LINE 65: short of eight miles, there and back—and over a somewhat rough,
LINE 66: fatiguing road."
LINE 67: "In what direction does it lie?"
LINE 68: I described the situation as well as I could, and was entering upon an
LINE 69: explanation of the various roads, lanes, and fields to be traversed in
LINE 70: order to reach it, the goings straight on, and turnings to the right
LINE 71: and the left, when she checked me with,—
LINE 72: "Oh, stop! don't tell me now: I shall forget every word of your
LINE 73: directions before I require them. I shall not think about going till
LINE 74: next spring; and then, perhaps, I may trouble you. At present we have
LINE 75: the winter before us, and—"
LINE 76: She suddenly paused, with a suppressed exclamation, started up from her
LINE 77: seat, and saying, "Excuse me one moment," hurried from the room, and
LINE 78: shut the door behind her.
LINE 79: Curious to see what had startled her so, I looked towards the
LINE 80: window—for her eyes had been carelessly fixed upon it the moment
LINE 81: before—and just beheld the skirts of a man's coat vanishing behind a
LINE 82: large holly-bush that stood between the window and the porch.
LINE 83: "It's mamma's friend," said Arthur.
LINE 84: Rose and I looked at each other.
LINE 85: "I don't know what to make of her at all," whispered Rose.
LINE 86: The child looked at her in grave surprise. She straightway began to
LINE 87: talk to him on indifferent matters, while I amused myself with looking
LINE 88: at the pictures. There was one in an obscure corner that I had not
LINE 89: before observed. It was a little child, seated on the grass with its
LINE 90: lap full of flowers. The tiny features and large blue eyes, smiling
LINE 91: through a shock of light brown curls, shaken over the forehead as it
LINE 92: bent above its treasure, bore sufficient resemblance to those of the
LINE 93: young gentleman before me to proclaim it a portrait of Arthur Graham in
LINE 94: his early infancy.
LINE 95: In taking this up to bring it to the light, I discovered another behind
LINE 96: it, with its face to the wall. I ventured to take that up too. It was
LINE 97: the portrait of a gentleman in the full prime of youthful
LINE 98: manhood—handsome enough, and not badly executed; but if done by the
LINE 99: same hand as the others, it was evidently some years before; for there
LINE 100: was far more careful minuteness of detail, and less of that freshness
LINE 101: of colouring and freedom of handling that delighted and surprised me in
LINE 102: them. Nevertheless, I surveyed it with considerable interest. There was
LINE 103: a certain individuality in the features and expression that stamped it,
LINE 104: at once, a successful likeness. The bright blue eyes regarded the
LINE 105: spectator with a kind of lurking drollery—you almost expected to see
LINE 106: them wink; the lips—a little too voluptuously full—seemed ready to
LINE 107: break into a smile; the warmly-tinted cheeks were embellished with a
LINE 108: luxuriant growth of reddish whiskers; while the bright chestnut hair,
LINE 109: clustering in abundant, wavy curls, trespassed too much upon the
LINE 110: forehead, and seemed to intimate that the owner thereof was prouder of
LINE 111: his beauty than his intellect—as, perhaps, he had reason to be; and yet
LINE 112: he looked no fool.
LINE 113: I had not had the portrait in my hands two minutes before the fair
LINE 114: artist returned.
LINE 115: "Only some one come about the pictures," said she, in apology for her
LINE 116: abrupt departure: "I told him to wait."
LINE 117: "I fear it will be considered an act of impertinence," I said "to
LINE 118: presume to look at a picture that the artist has turned to the wall;
LINE 119: but may I ask—"
LINE 120: "It _is_ an act of very great impertinence, sir; and therefore I beg
LINE 121: you will ask nothing about it, for your curiosity will not be
LINE 122: gratified," replied she, attempting to cover the tartness of her rebuke
LINE 123: with a smile; but I could see, by her flushed cheek and kindling eye,
LINE 124: that she was seriously annoyed.
LINE 125: "I was only going to ask if you had painted it yourself," said I,
LINE 126: sulkily resigning the picture into her hands; for without a grain of
LINE 127: ceremony she took it from me; and quickly restoring it to the dark
LINE 128: corner, with its face to the wall, placed the other against it as
LINE 129: before, and then turned to me and laughed.
LINE 130: But I was in no humour for jesting. I carelessly turned to the window,
LINE 131: and stood looking out upon the desolate garden, leaving her to talk to
LINE 132: Rose for a minute or two; and then, telling my sister it was time to
LINE 133: go, shook hands with the little gentleman, coolly bowed to the lady,
LINE 134: and moved towards the door. But, having bid adieu to Rose, Mrs. Graham
LINE 135: presented her hand to me, saying, with a soft voice, and by no means a
LINE 136: disagreeable smile,—"Let not the sun go down upon your wrath, Mr.
LINE 137: Markham. I'm sorry I offended you by my abruptness."
LINE 138: When a lady condescends to apologise, there is no keeping one's anger,
LINE 139: of course; so we parted good friends for once; and _this_ time I
LINE 140: squeezed her hand with a cordial, not a spiteful pressure.