LINE 1: December 20th, 1824.—This is the third anniversary of our felicitous
LINE 2: union. It is now two months since our guests left us to the enjoyment
LINE 3: of each other's society; and I have had nine weeks' experience of this
LINE 4: new phase of conjugal life—two persons living together, as master and
LINE 5: mistress of the house, and father and mother of a winsome, merry little
LINE 6: child, with the mutual understanding that there is no love, friendship,
LINE 7: or sympathy between them. As far as in me lies, I endeavour to live
LINE 8: peaceably with him: I treat him with unimpeachable civility, give up my
LINE 9: convenience to his, wherever it may reasonably be done, and consult him
LINE 10: in a business-like way on household affairs, deferring to his pleasure
LINE 11: and judgment, even when I know the latter to be inferior to my own.
LINE 12: As for him, for the first week or two, he was peevish and low,
LINE 13: fretting, I suppose, over his dear Annabella's departure, and
LINE 14: particularly ill-tempered to me: everything I did was wrong; I was
LINE 15: cold-hearted, hard, insensate; my sour, pale face was perfectly
LINE 16: repulsive; my voice made him shudder; he knew not how he could live
LINE 17: through the winter with me; I should kill him by inches. Again I
LINE 18: proposed a separation, but it would not do: he was not going to be the
LINE 19: talk of all the old gossips in the neighbourhood: he would not have it
LINE 20: said that he was such a brute his wife could not live with him. No; he
LINE 21: must contrive to bear with me.
LINE 22: "I must contrive to bear with _you_, you mean," said I; "for so long as
LINE 23: I discharge my functions of steward and house-keeper, so
LINE 24: conscientiously and well, without pay and without thanks, you cannot
LINE 25: afford to part with me. I shall therefore remit these duties when my
LINE 26: bondage becomes intolerable." This threat, I thought, would serve to
LINE 27: keep him in check, if anything would.
LINE 28: I believe he was much disappointed that I did not feel his offensive
LINE 29: sayings more acutely, for when he had said anything particularly well
LINE 30: calculated to hurt my feelings, he would stare me searchingly in the
LINE 31: face, and then grumble against my "marble heart" or my "brutal
LINE 32: insensibility." If I had bitterly wept and deplored his lost affection,
LINE 33: he would, perhaps, have condescended to pity me, and taken me into
LINE 34: favour for a while, just to comfort his solitude and console him for
LINE 35: the absence of his beloved Annabella, until he could meet her again, or
LINE 36: some more fitting substitute. Thank heaven, I am not so weak as that! I
LINE 37: was infatuated once with a foolish, besotted affection, that clung to
LINE 38: him in spite of his unworthiness, but it is fairly gone now—wholly
LINE 39: crushed and withered away; and he has none but himself and his vices to
LINE 40: thank for it.
LINE 41: At first (in compliance with his sweet lady's injunctions, I suppose),
LINE 42: he abstained wonderfully well from seeking to solace his cares in wine;
LINE 43: but at length he began to relax his virtuous efforts, and now and then
LINE 44: exceeded a little, and still continues to do so; nay, sometimes, not a
LINE 45: little. When he is under the exciting influence of these excesses, he
LINE 46: sometimes fires up and attempts to play the brute; and then I take
LINE 47: little pains to suppress my scorn and disgust. When he is under the
LINE 48: _depressing_ influence of the after-consequences, he bemoans his
LINE 49: sufferings and his errors, and charges them both upon me; he knows such
LINE 50: indulgence injures his health, and does him more harm than good; but he
LINE 51: says I drive him to it by my unnatural, unwomanly conduct; it will be
LINE 52: the ruin of him in the end, but it is all my fault; and _then_ I am
LINE 53: roused to defend myself, sometimes with bitter recrimination. This is a
LINE 54: kind of injustice I cannot patiently endure. Have I not laboured long
LINE 55: and hard to save him from this very vice? Would I not labour still to
LINE 56: deliver him from it if I could? but could I do so by fawning upon him
LINE 57: and caressing him when I know that he scorns me? Is it _my_ fault that
LINE 58: I have lost my influence with him, or that he has forfeited every claim
LINE 59: to my regard? And should I seek a reconciliation with him, when I feel
LINE 60: that I abhor him, and that he despises me? and while he continues still
LINE 61: to correspond with Lady Lowborough, as I know he does? No, never,
LINE 62: never, never! he may drink himself dead, but it is NOT my fault!
LINE 63: Yet I do my part to save him still: I give him to understand that
LINE 64: drinking makes his eyes dull, and his face red and bloated; and that it
LINE 65: tends to render him imbecile in body and mind; and if Annabella were to
LINE 66: see him as often as I do, she would speedily be disenchanted; and that
LINE 67: she certainly will withdraw her favour from him, if he continues such
LINE 68: courses. Such a mode of admonition wins only coarse abuse for me—and,
LINE 69: indeed, I almost feel as if I deserved it, for I hate to use such
LINE 70: arguments; but they sink into his stupefied heart, and make him pause,
LINE 71: and ponder, and abstain, more than anything else I could say.
LINE 72: At present I am enjoying a temporary relief from his presence: he is
LINE 73: gone with Hargrave to join a distant hunt, and will probably not be
LINE 74: back before to-morrow evening. How differently I used to feel his
LINE 75: absence!
LINE 76: Mr. Hargrave is still at the Grove. He and Arthur frequently meet to
LINE 77: pursue their rural sports together: he often calls upon us here, and
LINE 78: Arthur not unfrequently rides over to him. I do not think either of
LINE 79: these soi-disant friends is overflowing with love for the other; but
LINE 80: such intercourse serves to get the time on, and I am very willing it
LINE 81: should continue, as it saves me some hours of discomfort in Arthur's
LINE 82: society, and gives him some better employment than the sottish
LINE 83: indulgence of his sensual appetites. The only objection I have to Mr.
LINE 84: Hargrave's being in the neighbourhood, is that the fear of meeting him
LINE 85: at the Grove prevents me from seeing his sister so often as I otherwise
LINE 86: should; for, of late, he has conducted himself towards me with such
LINE 87: unerring propriety, that I have almost forgotten his former conduct. I
LINE 88: suppose he is striving to "win my esteem." If he continue to act in
LINE 89: this way, he _may_ win it; but what then? The moment he attempts to
LINE 90: demand anything more, he will lose it again.
LINE 91: February 10th.—It is a hard, embittering thing to have one's kind
LINE 92: feelings and good intentions cast back in one's teeth. I was beginning
LINE 93: to relent towards my wretched partner; to pity his forlorn, comfortless
LINE 94: condition, unalleviated as it is by the consolations of intellectual
LINE 95: resources and the answer of a good conscience towards God; and to think
LINE 96: I ought to sacrifice my pride, and renew my efforts once again to make
LINE 97: his home agreeable and lead him back to the path of virtue; not by
LINE 98: false professions of love, and not by pretended remorse, but by
LINE 99: mitigating my habitual coldness of manner, and commuting my frigid
LINE 100: civility into kindness wherever an opportunity occurred; and not only
LINE 101: was I beginning to think so, but I had already begun to act upon the
LINE 102: thought—and what was the result? No answering spark of kindness, no
LINE 103: awakening penitence, but an unappeasable ill-humour, and a spirit of
LINE 104: tyrannous exaction that increased with indulgence, and a lurking gleam
LINE 105: of self-complacent triumph at every detection of relenting softness in
LINE 106: my manner, that congealed me to marble again as often as it recurred;
LINE 107: and this morning he finished the business:—I think the petrifaction is
LINE 108: so completely effected at last that nothing can melt me again. Among
LINE 109: his letters was one which he perused with symptoms of unusual
LINE 110: gratification, and then threw it across the table to me, with the
LINE 111: admonition,—
LINE 112: "There! read that, and take a lesson by it!"
LINE 113: It was in the free, dashing hand of Lady Lowborough. I glanced at the
LINE 114: first page; it seemed full of extravagant protestations of affection;
LINE 115: impetuous longings for a speedy reunion—and impious defiance of God's
LINE 116: mandates, and railings against His providence for having cast their lot
LINE 117: asunder, and doomed them both to the hateful bondage of alliance with
LINE 118: those they could not love. He gave a slight titter on seeing me change
LINE 119: colour. I folded up the letter, rose, and returned it to him, with no
LINE 120: remark, but—
LINE 121: "Thank you, I _will_ take a lesson by it!"
LINE 122: My little Arthur was standing between his knees, delightedly playing
LINE 123: with the bright, ruby ring on his finger. Urged by a sudden, imperative
LINE 124: impulse to deliver my son from that contaminating influence, I caught
LINE 125: him up in my arms and carried him with me out of the room. Not liking
LINE 126: this abrupt removal, the child began to pout and cry. This was a new
LINE 127: stab to my already tortured heart. I would not let him go; but, taking
LINE 128: him with me into the library, I shut the door, and, kneeling on the
LINE 129: floor beside him, I embraced him, kissed him, wept over with him with
LINE 130: passionate fondness. Rather frightened than consoled by this, he turned
LINE 131: struggling from me, and cried out aloud for his papa. I released him
LINE 132: from my arms, and never were more bitter tears than those that now
LINE 133: concealed him from my blinded, burning eyes. Hearing his cries, the
LINE 134: father came to the room. I instantly turned away, lest he should see
LINE 135: and misconstrue my emotion. He swore at me, and took the now pacified
LINE 136: child away.
LINE 137: It is hard that my little darling should love him more than me; and
LINE 138: that, when the well-being and culture of my son is all I have to live
LINE 139: for, I should see my influence destroyed by one whose selfish affection
LINE 140: is more injurious than the coldest indifference or the harshest tyranny
LINE 141: could be. If I, for his good, deny him some trifling indulgence, he
LINE 142: goes to his father, and the latter, in spite of his selfish indolence,
LINE 143: will even give himself some trouble to meet the child's desires: if I
LINE 144: attempt to curb his will, or look gravely on him for some act of
LINE 145: childish disobedience, he knows his other parent will smile and take
LINE 146: his part against me. Thus, not only have I the father's spirit in the
LINE 147: son to contend against, the germs of his evil tendencies to search out
LINE 148: and eradicate, and his corrupting intercourse and example in after-life
LINE 149: to counteract, but already _he_ counteracts my arduous labour for the
LINE 150: child's advantage, destroys my influence over his tender mind, and robs
LINE 151: me of his very love; I had no earthly hope but this, and he seems to
LINE 152: take a diabolical delight in tearing it away.
LINE 153: But it is wrong to despair; I will remember the counsel of the inspired
LINE 154: writer to him "that feareth the Lord and obeyeth the voice of his
LINE 155: servant, that _sitteth in darkness and hath no light;_ let him trust in
LINE 156: the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God!"