LINE 1: Mr. and Mrs. John Knightley were not detained long at Hartfield. The
LINE 2: weather soon improved enough for those to move who must move; and Mr.
LINE 3: Woodhouse having, as usual, tried to persuade his daughter to stay
LINE 4: behind with all her children, was obliged to see the whole party set
LINE 5: off, and return to his lamentations over the destiny of poor
LINE 6: Isabella;—which poor Isabella, passing her life with those she doated
LINE 7: on, full of their merits, blind to their faults, and always innocently
LINE 8: busy, might have been a model of right feminine happiness.
LINE 9: The evening of the very day on which they went brought a note from Mr.
LINE 10: Elton to Mr. Woodhouse, a long, civil, ceremonious note, to say, with
LINE 11: Mr. Elton's best compliments, "that he was proposing to leave Highbury
LINE 12: the following morning in his way to Bath; where, in compliance with the
LINE 13: pressing entreaties of some friends, he had engaged to spend a few
LINE 14: weeks, and very much regretted the impossibility he was under, from
LINE 15: various circumstances of weather and business, of taking a personal
LINE 16: leave of Mr. Woodhouse, of whose friendly civilities he should ever
LINE 17: retain a grateful sense—and had Mr. Woodhouse any commands, should be
LINE 18: happy to attend to them."
LINE 19: Emma was most agreeably surprized.—Mr. Elton's absence just at this
LINE 20: time was the very thing to be desired. She admired him for contriving
LINE 21: it, though not able to give him much credit for the manner in which it
LINE 22: was announced. Resentment could not have been more plainly spoken than
LINE 23: in a civility to her father, from which she was so pointedly excluded.
LINE 24: She had not even a share in his opening compliments.—Her name was not
LINE 25: mentioned;—and there was so striking a change in all this, and such an
LINE 26: ill-judged solemnity of leave-taking in his graceful acknowledgments,
LINE 27: as she thought, at first, could not escape her father's suspicion.
LINE 28: It did, however.—Her father was quite taken up with the surprize of so
LINE 29: sudden a journey, and his fears that Mr. Elton might never get safely
LINE 30: to the end of it, and saw nothing extraordinary in his language. It was
LINE 31: a very useful note, for it supplied them with fresh matter for thought
LINE 32: and conversation during the rest of their lonely evening. Mr. Woodhouse
LINE 33: talked over his alarms, and Emma was in spirits to persuade them away
LINE 34: with all her usual promptitude.
LINE 35: She now resolved to keep Harriet no longer in the dark. She had reason
LINE 36: to believe her nearly recovered from her cold, and it was desirable
LINE 37: that she should have as much time as possible for getting the better of
LINE 38: her other complaint before the gentleman's return. She went to Mrs.
LINE 39: Goddard's accordingly the very next day, to undergo the necessary
LINE 40: penance of communication; and a severe one it was.—She had to destroy
LINE 41: all the hopes which she had been so industriously feeding—to appear in
LINE 42: the ungracious character of the one preferred—and acknowledge herself
LINE 43: grossly mistaken and mis-judging in all her ideas on one subject, all
LINE 44: her observations, all her convictions, all her prophecies for the last
LINE 45: six weeks.
LINE 46: The confession completely renewed her first shame—and the sight of
LINE 47: Harriet's tears made her think that she should never be in charity with
LINE 48: herself again.
LINE 49: Harriet bore the intelligence very well—blaming nobody—and in every
LINE 50: thing testifying such an ingenuousness of disposition and lowly opinion
LINE 51: of herself, as must appear with particular advantage at that moment to
LINE 52: her friend.
LINE 53: Emma was in the humour to value simplicity and modesty to the utmost;
LINE 54: and all that was amiable, all that ought to be attaching, seemed on
LINE 55: Harriet's side, not her own. Harriet did not consider herself as having
LINE 56: any thing to complain of. The affection of such a man as Mr. Elton
LINE 57: would have been too great a distinction.—She never could have deserved
LINE 58: him—and nobody but so partial and kind a friend as Miss Woodhouse would
LINE 59: have thought it possible.
LINE 60: Her tears fell abundantly—but her grief was so truly artless, that no
LINE 61: dignity could have made it more respectable in Emma's eyes—and she
LINE 62: listened to her and tried to console her with all her heart and
LINE 63: understanding—really for the time convinced that Harriet was the
LINE 64: superior creature of the two—and that to resemble her would be more for
LINE 65: her own welfare and happiness than all that genius or intelligence
LINE 66: could do.
LINE 67: It was rather too late in the day to set about being simple-minded and
LINE 68: ignorant; but she left her with every previous resolution confirmed of
LINE 69: being humble and discreet, and repressing imagination all the rest of
LINE 70: her life. Her second duty now, inferior only to her father's claims,
LINE 71: was to promote Harriet's comfort, and endeavour to prove her own
LINE 72: affection in some better method than by match-making. She got her to
LINE 73: Hartfield, and shewed her the most unvarying kindness, striving to
LINE 74: occupy and amuse her, and by books and conversation, to drive Mr. Elton
LINE 75: from her thoughts.
LINE 76: Time, she knew, must be allowed for this being thoroughly done; and she
LINE 77: could suppose herself but an indifferent judge of such matters in
LINE 78: general, and very inadequate to sympathise in an attachment to Mr.
LINE 79: Elton in particular; but it seemed to her reasonable that at Harriet's
LINE 80: age, and with the entire extinction of all hope, such a progress might
LINE 81: be made towards a state of composure by the time of Mr. Elton's return,
LINE 82: as to allow them all to meet again in the common routine of
LINE 83: acquaintance, without any danger of betraying sentiments or increasing
LINE 84: them.
LINE 85: Harriet did think him all perfection, and maintained the non-existence
LINE 86: of any body equal to him in person or goodness—and did, in truth, prove
LINE 87: herself more resolutely in love than Emma had foreseen; but yet it
LINE 88: appeared to her so natural, so inevitable to strive against an
LINE 89: inclination of that sort _unrequited_, that she could not comprehend
LINE 90: its continuing very long in equal force.
LINE 91: If Mr. Elton, on his return, made his own indifference as evident and
LINE 92: indubitable as she could not doubt he would anxiously do, she could not
LINE 93: imagine Harriet's persisting to place her happiness in the sight or the
LINE 94: recollection of him.
LINE 95: Their being fixed, so absolutely fixed, in the same place, was bad for
LINE 96: each, for all three. Not one of them had the power of removal, or of
LINE 97: effecting any material change of society. They must encounter each
LINE 98: other, and make the best of it.
LINE 99: Harriet was farther unfortunate in the tone of her companions at Mrs.
LINE 100: Goddard's; Mr. Elton being the adoration of all the teachers and great
LINE 101: girls in the school; and it must be at Hartfield only that she could
LINE 102: have any chance of hearing him spoken of with cooling moderation or
LINE 103: repellent truth. Where the wound had been given, there must the cure be
LINE 104: found if anywhere; and Emma felt that, till she saw her in the way of
LINE 105: cure, there could be no true peace for herself.