LINE 1: Mr. Weston was a native of Highbury, and born of a respectable family,
LINE 2: which for the last two or three generations had been rising into
LINE 3: gentility and property. He had received a good education, but, on
LINE 4: succeeding early in life to a small independence, had become indisposed
LINE 5: for any of the more homely pursuits in which his brothers were engaged,
LINE 6: and had satisfied an active, cheerful mind and social temper by
LINE 7: entering into the militia of his county, then embodied.
LINE 8: Captain Weston was a general favourite; and when the chances of his
LINE 9: military life had introduced him to Miss Churchill, of a great
LINE 10: Yorkshire family, and Miss Churchill fell in love with him, nobody was
LINE 11: surprized, except her brother and his wife, who had never seen him, and
LINE 12: who were full of pride and importance, which the connexion would
LINE 13: offend.
LINE 14: Miss Churchill, however, being of age, and with the full command of her
LINE 15: fortune—though her fortune bore no proportion to the family-estate—was
LINE 16: not to be dissuaded from the marriage, and it took place, to the
LINE 17: infinite mortification of Mr. and Mrs. Churchill, who threw her off
LINE 18: with due decorum. It was an unsuitable connexion, and did not produce
LINE 19: much happiness. Mrs. Weston ought to have found more in it, for she had
LINE 20: a husband whose warm heart and sweet temper made him think every thing
LINE 21: due to her in return for the great goodness of being in love with him;
LINE 22: but though she had one sort of spirit, she had not the best. She had
LINE 23: resolution enough to pursue her own will in spite of her brother, but
LINE 24: not enough to refrain from unreasonable regrets at that brother's
LINE 25: unreasonable anger, nor from missing the luxuries of her former home.
LINE 26: They lived beyond their income, but still it was nothing in comparison
LINE 27: of Enscombe: she did not cease to love her husband, but she wanted at
LINE 28: once to be the wife of Captain Weston, and Miss Churchill of Enscombe.
LINE 29: Captain Weston, who had been considered, especially by the Churchills,
LINE 30: as making such an amazing match, was proved to have much the worst of
LINE 31: the bargain; for when his wife died, after a three years' marriage, he
LINE 32: was rather a poorer man than at first, and with a child to maintain.
LINE 33: From the expense of the child, however, he was soon relieved. The boy
LINE 34: had, with the additional softening claim of a lingering illness of his
LINE 35: mother's, been the means of a sort of reconciliation; and Mr. and Mrs.
LINE 36: Churchill, having no children of their own, nor any other young
LINE 37: creature of equal kindred to care for, offered to take the whole charge
LINE 38: of the little Frank soon after her decease. Some scruples and some
LINE 39: reluctance the widower-father may be supposed to have felt; but as they
LINE 40: were overcome by other considerations, the child was given up to the
LINE 41: care and the wealth of the Churchills, and he had only his own comfort
LINE 42: to seek, and his own situation to improve as he could.
LINE 43: A complete change of life became desirable. He quitted the militia and
LINE 44: engaged in trade, having brothers already established in a good way in
LINE 45: London, which afforded him a favourable opening. It was a concern which
LINE 46: brought just employment enough. He had still a small house in Highbury,
LINE 47: where most of his leisure days were spent; and between useful
LINE 48: occupation and the pleasures of society, the next eighteen or twenty
LINE 49: years of his life passed cheerfully away. He had, by that time,
LINE 50: realised an easy competence—enough to secure the purchase of a little
LINE 51: estate adjoining Highbury, which he had always longed for—enough to
LINE 52: marry a woman as portionless even as Miss Taylor, and to live according
LINE 53: to the wishes of his own friendly and social disposition.
LINE 54: It was now some time since Miss Taylor had begun to influence his
LINE 55: schemes; but as it was not the tyrannic influence of youth on youth, it
LINE 56: had not shaken his determination of never settling till he could
LINE 57: purchase Randalls, and the sale of Randalls was long looked forward to;
LINE 58: but he had gone steadily on, with these objects in view, till they were
LINE 59: accomplished. He had made his fortune, bought his house, and obtained
LINE 60: his wife; and was beginning a new period of existence, with every
LINE 61: probability of greater happiness than in any yet passed through. He had
LINE 62: never been an unhappy man; his own temper had secured him from that,
LINE 63: even in his first marriage; but his second must shew him how delightful
LINE 64: a well-judging and truly amiable woman could be, and must give him the
LINE 65: pleasantest proof of its being a great deal better to choose than to be
LINE 66: chosen, to excite gratitude than to feel it.
LINE 67: He had only himself to please in his choice: his fortune was his own;
LINE 68: for as to Frank, it was more than being tacitly brought up as his
LINE 69: uncle's heir, it had become so avowed an adoption as to have him assume
LINE 70: the name of Churchill on coming of age. It was most unlikely,
LINE 71: therefore, that he should ever want his father's assistance. His father
LINE 72: had no apprehension of it. The aunt was a capricious woman, and
LINE 73: governed her husband entirely; but it was not in Mr. Weston's nature to
LINE 74: imagine that any caprice could be strong enough to affect one so dear,
LINE 75: and, as he believed, so deservedly dear. He saw his son every year in
LINE 76: London, and was proud of him; and his fond report of him as a very fine
LINE 77: young man had made Highbury feel a sort of pride in him too. He was
LINE 78: looked on as sufficiently belonging to the place to make his merits and
LINE 79: prospects a kind of common concern.
LINE 80: Mr. Frank Churchill was one of the boasts of Highbury, and a lively
LINE 81: curiosity to see him prevailed, though the compliment was so little
LINE 82: returned that he had never been there in his life. His coming to visit
LINE 83: his father had been often talked of but never achieved.
LINE 84: Now, upon his father's marriage, it was very generally proposed, as a
LINE 85: most proper attention, that the visit should take place. There was not
LINE 86: a dissentient voice on the subject, either when Mrs. Perry drank tea
LINE 87: with Mrs. and Miss Bates, or when Mrs. and Miss Bates returned the
LINE 88: visit. Now was the time for Mr. Frank Churchill to come among them; and
LINE 89: the hope strengthened when it was understood that he had written to his
LINE 90: new mother on the occasion. For a few days, every morning visit in
LINE 91: Highbury included some mention of the handsome letter Mrs. Weston had
LINE 92: received. "I suppose you have heard of the handsome letter Mr. Frank
LINE 93: Churchill has written to Mrs. Weston? I understand it was a very
LINE 94: handsome letter, indeed. Mr. Woodhouse told me of it. Mr. Woodhouse saw
LINE 95: the letter, and he says he never saw such a handsome letter in his
LINE 96: life."
LINE 97: It was, indeed, a highly prized letter. Mrs. Weston had, of course,
LINE 98: formed a very favourable idea of the young man; and such a pleasing
LINE 99: attention was an irresistible proof of his great good sense, and a most
LINE 100: welcome addition to every source and every expression of congratulation
LINE 101: which her marriage had already secured. She felt herself a most
LINE 102: fortunate woman; and she had lived long enough to know how fortunate
LINE 103: she might well be thought, where the only regret was for a partial
LINE 104: separation from friends whose friendship for her had never cooled, and
LINE 105: who could ill bear to part with her.
LINE 106: She knew that at times she must be missed; and could not think, without
LINE 107: pain, of Emma's losing a single pleasure, or suffering an hour's ennui,
LINE 108: from the want of her companionableness: but dear Emma was of no feeble
LINE 109: character; she was more equal to her situation than most girls would
LINE 110: have been, and had sense, and energy, and spirits that might be hoped
LINE 111: would bear her well and happily through its little difficulties and
LINE 112: privations. And then there was such comfort in the very easy distance
LINE 113: of Randalls from Hartfield, so convenient for even solitary female
LINE 114: walking, and in Mr. Weston's disposition and circumstances, which would
LINE 115: make the approaching season no hindrance to their spending half the
LINE 116: evenings in the week together.
LINE 117: Her situation was altogether the subject of hours of gratitude to Mrs.
LINE 118: Weston, and of moments only of regret; and her satisfaction—her more
LINE 119: than satisfaction—her cheerful enjoyment, was so just and so apparent,
LINE 120: that Emma, well as she knew her father, was sometimes taken by surprize
LINE 121: at his being still able to pity 'poor Miss Taylor,' when they left her
LINE 122: at Randalls in the centre of every domestic comfort, or saw her go away
LINE 123: in the evening attended by her pleasant husband to a carriage of her
LINE 124: own. But never did she go without Mr. Woodhouse's giving a gentle sigh,
LINE 125: and saying, "Ah, poor Miss Taylor! She would be very glad to stay."
LINE 126: There was no recovering Miss Taylor—nor much likelihood of ceasing to
LINE 127: pity her; but a few weeks brought some alleviation to Mr. Woodhouse.
LINE 128: The compliments of his neighbours were over; he was no longer teased by
LINE 129: being wished joy of so sorrowful an event; and the wedding-cake, which
LINE 130: had been a great distress to him, was all eat up. His own stomach could
LINE 131: bear nothing rich, and he could never believe other people to be
LINE 132: different from himself. What was unwholesome to him he regarded as
LINE 133: unfit for any body; and he had, therefore, earnestly tried to dissuade
LINE 134: them from having any wedding-cake at all, and when that proved vain, as
LINE 135: earnestly tried to prevent any body's eating it. He had been at the
LINE 136: pains of consulting Mr. Perry, the apothecary, on the subject. Mr.
LINE 137: Perry was an intelligent, gentlemanlike man, whose frequent visits were
LINE 138: one of the comforts of Mr. Woodhouse's life; and upon being applied to,
LINE 139: he could not but acknowledge (though it seemed rather against the bias
LINE 140: of inclination) that wedding-cake might certainly disagree with
LINE 141: many—perhaps with most people, unless taken moderately. With such an
LINE 142: opinion, in confirmation of his own, Mr. Woodhouse hoped to influence
LINE 143: every visitor of the newly married pair; but still the cake was eaten;
LINE 144: and there was no rest for his benevolent nerves till it was all gone.
LINE 145: There was a strange rumour in Highbury of all the little Perrys being
LINE 146: seen with a slice of Mrs. Weston's wedding-cake in their hands: but Mr.
LINE 147: Woodhouse would never believe it.