LINE 1: Miss Bürstner's Friend
LINE 2: For some time after this, K. found it impossible to exchange even just a
LINE 3: few words with Miss Bürstner. He tried to reach her in many and various
LINE 4: ways but she always found a way to avoid it. He would come straight home
LINE 5: from the office, remain in her room without the light on, and sit on the
LINE 6: sofa with nothing more to distract him than keeping watch on the empty
LINE 7: hallway. If the maid went by and closed the door of the apparently empty
LINE 8: room he would get up after a while and open it again. He got up an hour
LINE 9: earlier than usual in the morning so that he might perhaps find Miss
LINE 10: Bürstner alone as she went to the office. But none of these efforts
LINE 11: brought any success. Then he wrote her a letter, both to the office and
LINE 12: the flat, attempting once more to justify his behaviour, offered to make
LINE 13: whatever amends he could, promised never to cross whatever boundary she
LINE 14: might set him and begged merely to have the chance to speak to her some
LINE 15: time, especially as he was unable to do anything with Mrs. Grubach
LINE 16: either until he had spoken with Miss Bürstner, he finally informed her
LINE 17: that the following Sunday he would stay in his room all day waiting for
LINE 18: a sign from her that there was some hope of his request being fulfilled,
LINE 19: or at least that she would explain to him why she could not fulfil it
LINE 20: even though he had promised to observe whatever stipulations she might
LINE 21: make. The letters were not returned, but there was no answer either.
LINE 22: However, on the following Sunday there was a sign that seemed clear
LINE 23: enough. It was still early when K. noticed, through the keyhole, that
LINE 24: there was an unusual level of activity in the hallway which soon abated.
LINE 25: A French teacher, although she was German and called Montag, a pale and
LINE 26: febrile girl with a slight limp who had previously occupied a room of
LINE 27: her own, was moving into Miss Bürstner's room. She could be seen
LINE 28: shuffling through the hallway for several hours, there was always
LINE 29: another piece of clothing or a blanket or a book that she had forgotten
LINE 30: and had to be fetched specially and brought into the new home.
LINE 31: When Mrs. Grubach brought K. his breakfast--ever since the time when she
LINE 32: had made K. so cross she didn't trust the maid to do the slightest
LINE 33: job--he had no choice but to speak to her, for the first time in five
LINE 34: days. "Why is there so much noise in the hallway today?" he asked as she
LINE 35: poured his coffee out, "Can't something be done about it? Does this
LINE 36: clearing out have to be done on a Sunday?" K. did not look up at Mrs.
LINE 37: Grubach, but he saw nonetheless that she seemed to feel some relief as
LINE 38: she breathed in. Even sharp questions like this from Mr. K. she
LINE 39: perceived as forgiveness, or as the beginning of forgiveness. "We're not
LINE 40: clearing anything out, Mr. K.," she said, "it's just that Miss Montag is
LINE 41: moving in with Miss Bürstner and is moving her things across." She said
LINE 42: nothing more, but just waited to see how K. would take it and whether he
LINE 43: would allow her to carry on speaking. But K. kept her in uncertainty,
LINE 44: took the spoon and pensively stirred his coffee while he remained
LINE 45: silent. Then he looked up at her and said, "What about the suspicions
LINE 46: you had earlier about Miss Bürstner, have you given them up?" "Mr. K.,"
LINE 47: called Mrs. Grubach, who had been waiting for this very question, as she
LINE 48: put her hands together and held them out towards him. "I just made a
LINE 49: chance remark and you took it so badly. I didn't have the slightest
LINE 50: intention of offending anyone, not you or anyone else. You've known me
LINE 51: for long enough, Mr. K., I'm sure you're convinced of that. You don't
LINE 52: know how I've been suffering for the past few days! That I should tell
LINE 53: lies about my tenants! And you, Mr. K., you believed it! And said I
LINE 54: should give you notice! Give you notice!" At this last outcry, Mrs.
LINE 55: Grubach was already choking back her tears, she raised her apron to her
LINE 56: face and blubbered out loud.
LINE 57: "Oh, don't cry Mrs. Grubach," said K., looking out the window, he was
LINE 58: thinking only of Miss Bürstner and how she was accepting an unknown girl
LINE 59: into her room. "Now don't cry," he said again as he turned his look back
LINE 60: into the room where Mrs. Grubach was still crying. "I meant no harm
LINE 61: either when I said that. It was simply a misunderstanding between us.
LINE 62: That can happen even between old friends sometimes." Mrs. Grubach pulled
LINE 63: her apron down to below her eyes to see whether K. really was attempting
LINE 64: a reconciliation. "Well, yes, that's how it is," said K., and as Mrs.
LINE 65: Grubach's behaviour indicated that the captain had said nothing he dared
LINE 66: to add, "Do you really think, then, that I'd want to make an enemy of
LINE 67: you for the sake of a girl we hardly know?" "Yes, you're quite right,
LINE 68: Mr. K.," said Mrs. Grubach, and then, to her misfortune, as soon as she
LINE 69: felt just a little freer to speak, she added something rather inept. "I
LINE 70: kept asking myself why it was that Mr. K. took such an interest in Miss
LINE 71: Bürstner. Why does he quarrel with me over her when he knows that any
LINE 72: cross word from him and I can't sleep that night? And I didn't say
LINE 73: anything about Miss Bürstner that I hadn't seen with my own eyes." K.
LINE 74: said nothing in reply, he should have chased her from the room as soon
LINE 75: as she had opened her mouth, and he didn't want to do that. He contented
LINE 76: himself with merely drinking his coffee and letting Mrs. Grubach feel
LINE 77: that she was superfluous. Outside, the dragging steps of Miss Montag
LINE 78: could still be heard as she went from one side of the hallway to the
LINE 79: other. "Do you hear that?" asked K. pointing his hand at the door.
LINE 80: "Yes," said Mrs. Grubach with a sigh, "I wanted to give her some help
LINE 81: and I wanted the maid to help her too but she's stubborn, she wants to
LINE 82: move everything in herself. I wonder at Miss Bürstner. I often feel it's
LINE 83: a burden for me to have Miss Montag as a tenant but Miss Bürstner
LINE 84: accepts her into her room with herself." "There's nothing there for you
LINE 85: to worry about," said K., crushing the remains of a sugar lump in his
LINE 86: cup. "Does she cause you any trouble?" "No," said Mrs. Grubach, "in
LINE 87: itself it's very good to have her there, it makes another room free for
LINE 88: me and I can let my nephew, the captain, occupy it. I began to worry he
LINE 89: might be disturbing you when I had to let him live in the living room
LINE 90: next to you over the last few days. He's not very considerate." "What an
LINE 91: idea!" said K. standing up, "there's no question of that. You seem to
LINE 92: think that because I can't stand this to-ing and fro-ing of Miss Montag
LINE 93: that I'm over-sensitive--and there she goes back again." Mrs. Grubach
LINE 94: appeared quite powerless. "Should I tell her to leave moving the rest of
LINE 95: her things over till later, then, Mr. K.? If that's what you want I'll
LINE 96: do it immediately." "But she has to move in with Miss Bürstner!" said K.
LINE 97: "Yes," said Mrs. Grubach, without quite understanding what K. meant. "So
LINE 98: she has to take her things over there." Mrs. Grubach just nodded. K. was
LINE 99: irritated all the more by this dumb helplessness which, seen from the
LINE 100: outside, could have seemed like a kind of defiance on her part. He began
LINE 101: to walk up and down the room between the window and the door, thus
LINE 102: depriving Mrs. Grubach of the chance to leave, which she otherwise
LINE 103: probably would have done.
LINE 104: Just as K. once more reached the door, someone knocked at it. It was the
LINE 105: maid, to say that Miss Montag would like to have a few words with Mr.
LINE 106: K., and therefore requested that he come to the dining room where she
LINE 107: was waiting for him. K. heard the maid out thoughtfully, and then looked
LINE 108: back at the shocked Mrs. Grubach in a way that was almost contemptuous.
LINE 109: His look seemed to be saying that K. had been expecting this invitation
LINE 110: for Miss Montag for a long time, and that it was confirmation of the
LINE 111: suffering he had been made to endure that Sunday morning from Mrs.
LINE 112: Grubach's tenants. He sent the maid back with the reply that he was on
LINE 113: his way, then he went to the wardrobe to change his coat, and in answer
LINE 114: to Mrs. Grubach's gentle whining about the nuisance Miss Montag was
LINE 115: causing merely asked her to clear away the breakfast things. "But you've
LINE 116: hardly touched it," said Mrs. Grubach. "Oh just take it away!" shouted
LINE 117: K. It seemed to him that Miss Montag was mixed up in everything and made
LINE 118: it repulsive to him.
LINE 119: As he went through the hallway he looked at the closed door of Miss
LINE 120: Bürstner's room. But it wasn't there that he was invited, but the dining
LINE 121: room, to which he yanked the door open without knocking.
LINE 122: The room was long but narrow with one window. There was only enough
LINE 123: space available to put two cupboards at an angle in the corner by the
LINE 124: door, and the rest of the room was entirely taken up with the long
LINE 125: dining table which started by the door and reached all the way to the
LINE 126: great window, which was thus made almost inaccessible. The table was
LINE 127: already laid for a large number of people, as on Sundays almost all the
LINE 128: tenants ate their dinner here at midday.
LINE 129: When K. entered, Miss Montag came towards him from the window along one
LINE 130: side of the table. They greeted each other in silence. Then Miss Montag,
LINE 131: her head unusually erect as always, said, "I'm not sure whether you know
LINE 132: me." K. looked at her with a frown. "Of course I do," he said, "you've
LINE 133: been living here with Mrs. Grubach for quite some time now." "But I get
LINE 134: the impression you don't pay much attention to what's going on in the
LINE 135: lodging house," said Miss Montag. "No," said K. "Would you not like to
LINE 136: sit down?" said Miss Montag. In silence, the two of them drew chairs out
LINE 137: from the farthest end of the table and sat down facing each other. But
LINE 138: Miss Montag stood straight up again as she had left her handbag on the
LINE 139: window sill and went to fetch it; she shuffled down the whole length of
LINE 140: the room. When she came back, the handbag lightly swinging, she said,
LINE 141: "I'd like just to have a few words with you on behalf of my friend. She
LINE 142: would have come herself, but she's feeling a little unwell today.
LINE 143: Perhaps you'll be kind enough to forgive her and listen to me instead.
LINE 144: There's anyway nothing that she could have said that I won't. On the
LINE 145: contrary, in fact, I think I can say even more than her because I'm
LINE 146: relatively impartial. Would you not agree?" "What is there to say,
LINE 147: then?" answered K., who was tired of Miss Montag continuously watching
LINE 148: his lips. In that way she took control of what he wanted to say before
LINE 149: he said it. "Miss Bürstner clearly refuses to grant me the personal
LINE 150: meeting that I asked her for." "That's how it is," said Miss Montag, "or
LINE 151: rather, that's not at all how it is, the way you put it is remarkably
LINE 152: severe. Generally speaking, meetings are neither granted nor the
LINE 153: opposite. But it can be that meetings are considered unnecessary, and
LINE 154: that's how it is here. Now, after your comment, I can speak openly. You
LINE 155: asked my friend, verbally or in writing, for the chance to speak with
LINE 156: her. Now my friend is aware of your reasons for asking for this
LINE 157: meeting--or at least I suppose she is--and so, for reasons I know
LINE 158: nothing about, she is quite sure that it would be of no benefit to
LINE 159: anyone if this meeting actually took place. Moreover, it was only
LINE 160: yesterday, and only very briefly, that she made it clear to me that such
LINE 161: a meeting could be of no benefit for yourself either, she feels that it
LINE 162: can only have been a matter of chance that such an idea came to you, and
LINE 163: that even without any explanations from her, you will very soon come to
LINE 164: realise yourself, if you have not done so already, the futility of your
LINE 165: idea. My answer to that is that although it may be quite right, I
LINE 166: consider it advantageous, if the matter is to be made perfectly clear,
LINE 167: to give you an explicit answer. I offered my services in taking on the
LINE 168: task, and after some hesitation my friend conceded. I hope, however,
LINE 169: also to have acted in your interests, as even the slightest uncertainty
LINE 170: in the least significant of matters will always remain a cause of
LINE 171: suffering and if, as in this case, it can be removed without substantial
LINE 172: effort, then it is better if that is done without delay." "I thank you,"
LINE 173: said K. as soon as Miss Montag had finished. He stood slowly up, looked
LINE 174: at her, then across the table, then out the window--the house opposite
LINE 175: stood there in the sun--and went to the door. Miss Montag followed him a
LINE 176: few paces, as if she did not quite trust him. At the door, however, both
LINE 177: of them had to step back as it opened and Captain Lanz entered. This was
LINE 178: the first time that K. had seen him close up. He was a large man of
LINE 179: about forty with a tanned, fleshy face. He bowed slightly, intending it
LINE 180: also for K., and then went over to Miss Montag and deferentially kissed
LINE 181: her hand. He was very elegant in the way he moved. The courtesy he
LINE 182: showed towards Miss Montag made a striking contrast with the way she had
LINE 183: been treated by K. Nonetheless, Miss Montag did not seem to be cross
LINE 184: with K. as it even seemed to him that she wanted to introduce the
LINE 185: captain. K. however, did not want to be introduced, he would not have
LINE 186: been able to show any sort of friendliness either to Miss Montag or to
LINE 187: the captain, the kiss on the hand had, for K., bound them into a group
LINE 188: which would keep him at a distance from Miss Bürstner whilst at the same
LINE 189: time seeming to be totally harmless and unselfish. K. thought, however,
LINE 190: that he saw more than that, he thought he also saw that Miss Montag had
LINE 191: chosen a means of doing it that was good, but two-edged. She exaggerated
LINE 192: the importance of the relationship between K. and Miss Bürstner, and
LINE 193: above all she exaggerated the importance of asking to speak with her and
LINE 194: she tried at the same time to make out that K. was exaggerating
LINE 195: everything. She would be disappointed, K. did not want to exaggerate
LINE 196: anything, he was aware that Miss Bürstner was a little typist who would
LINE 197: not offer him much resistance for long. In doing so he deliberately took
LINE 198: no account of what Mrs. Grubach had told him about Miss Bürstner. All
LINE 199: these things were going through his mind as he left the room with hardly
LINE 200: a polite word. He wanted to go straight to his room, but a little laugh
LINE 201: from Miss Montag that he heard from the dining room behind him brought
LINE 202: him to the idea that he might prepare a surprise for the two of them,
LINE 203: the captain and Miss Montag. He looked round and listened to find out if
LINE 204: there might be any disturbance from any of the surrounding rooms,
LINE 205: everywhere was quiet, the only thing to be heard was the conversation
LINE 206: from the dining room and Mrs. Grubach's voice from the passage leading
LINE 207: to the kitchen. This seemed an opportune time, K. went to Miss
LINE 208: Bürstner's room and knocked gently. There was no sound so he knocked
LINE 209: again but there was still no answer in reply. Was she asleep? Or was
LINE 210: she really unwell? Or was she just pretending as she realised it could
LINE 211: only be K. knocking so gently? K. assumed she was pretending and
LINE 212: knocked harder, eventually, when the knocking brought no result, he
LINE 213: carefully opened the door with the sense of doing something that was not
LINE 214: only improper but also pointless. In the room there was no-one. What's
LINE 215: more, it looked hardly at all like the room K. had known before. Against
LINE 216: the wall there were now two beds behind one another, there were clothes
LINE 217: piled up on three chairs near the door, a wardrobe stood open. Miss
LINE 218: Bürstner must have gone out while Miss Montag was speaking to him in the
LINE 219: dining room. K. was not greatly bothered by this, he had hardly expected
LINE 220: to be able to find Miss Bürstner so easily and had made this attempt for
LINE 221: little more reason than to spite Miss Montag. But that made it all the
LINE 222: more embarrassing for him when, as he was closing the door again, he saw
LINE 223: Miss Montag and the captain talking in the open doorway of the dining
LINE 224: room. They had probably been standing there ever since K. had opened the
LINE 225: door, they avoided seeming to observe K. but chatted lightly and
LINE 226: followed his movements with glances, the absent minded glances to the
LINE 227: side such as you make during a conversation. But these glances were
LINE 228: heavy for K., and he rushed alongside the wall back into his own room.