LINE 1: End
LINE 2: The evening before K.'s thirty-first birthday--it was about nine
LINE 3: o'clock in the evening, the time when the streets were quiet--two men
LINE 4: came to where he lived. In frock coats, pale and fat, wearing top hats
LINE 5: that looked like they could not be taken off their heads. After some
LINE 6: brief formalities at the door of the flat when they first arrived, the
LINE 7: same formalities were repeated at greater length at K.'s door. He had
LINE 8: not been notified they would be coming, but K. sat in a chair near the
LINE 9: door, dressed in black as they were, and slowly put on new gloves which
LINE 10: stretched tightly over his fingers and behaved as if he were expecting
LINE 11: visitors. He immediately stood up and looked at the gentlemen
LINE 12: inquisitively. "You've come for me then, have you?" he asked. The
LINE 13: gentlemen nodded, one of them indicated the other with the top hand now
LINE 14: in his hand. K. told them he had been expecting a different visitor. He
LINE 15: went to the window and looked once more down at the dark street. Most
LINE 16: of the windows on the other side of the street were also dark already,
LINE 17: many of them had the curtains closed. In one of the windows on the same
LINE 18: floor where there was a light on, two small children could be seen
LINE 19: playing with each other inside a playpen, unable to move from where
LINE 20: they were, reaching out for each other with their little hands. "Some
LINE 21: ancient, unimportant actors--that's what they've sent for me," said K.
LINE 22: to himself, and looked round once again to confirm this to himself.
LINE 23: "They want to sort me out as cheaply as they can." K. suddenly turned
LINE 24: round to face the two men and asked, "What theatre do you play in?"
LINE 25: "Theatre?" asked one of the gentlemen, turning to the other for
LINE 26: assistance and pulling in the corners of his mouth. The other made a
LINE 27: gesture like someone who was dumb, as if he were struggling with some
LINE 28: organism causing him trouble. "You're not properly prepared to answer
LINE 29: questions," said K. and went to fetch his hat.
LINE 30: As soon as they were on the stairs the gentlemen wanted to take K.'s
LINE 31: arms, but K. said "Wait till we're in the street, I'm not ill." But
LINE 32: they waited only until the front door before they took his arms in a
LINE 33: way that K. had never experienced before. They kept their shoulders
LINE 34: close behind his, did not turn their arms in but twisted them around
LINE 35: the entire length of K.'s arms and took hold of his hands with a grasp
LINE 36: that was formal, experienced and could not be resisted. K. was held
LINE 37: stiff and upright between them, they formed now a single unit so that if
LINE 38: any one of them had been knocked down all of them must have fallen.
LINE 39: They formed a unit of the sort that normally can be formed only by
LINE 40: matter that is lifeless.
LINE 41: Whenever they passed under a lamp K. tried to see his companions more
LINE 42: clearly, as far as was possible when they were pressed so close
LINE 43: together, as in the dim light of his room this had been hardly
LINE 44: possible. "Maybe they're tenors," he thought as he saw their big double
LINE 45: chins. The cleanliness of their faces disgusted him. He could see the
LINE 46: hands that cleaned them, passing over the corners of their eyes,
LINE 47: rubbing at their upper lips, scratching out the creases on those chins.
LINE 48: When K. noticed that, he stopped, which meant the others had to stop
LINE 49: too; they were at the edge of an open square, devoid of people but
LINE 50: decorated with flower beds. "Why did they send you, of all people!" he
LINE 51: cried out, more a shout than a question. The two gentleman clearly knew
LINE 52: no answer to give, they waited, their free arms hanging down, like
LINE 53: nurses when the patient needs to rest. "I will go no further," said K.
LINE 54: as if to see what would happen. The gentlemen did not need to make any
LINE 55: answer, it was enough that they did not loosen their grip on K. and
LINE 56: tried to move him on, but K. resisted them. "I'll soon have no need of
LINE 57: much strength, I'll use all of it now," he thought. He thought of the
LINE 58: flies that tear their legs off struggling to get free of the flypaper.
LINE 59: "These gentleman will have some hard work to do."
LINE 60: Just then, Miss Bürstner came up into the square in front of them from
LINE 61: the steps leading from a small street at a lower level. It was not
LINE 62: certain that it was her, although the similarity was, of course, great.
LINE 63: But it did not matter to K. whether it was certainly her anyway, he
LINE 64: just became suddenly aware that there was no point in his resistance.
LINE 65: There would be nothing heroic about it if he resisted, if he now caused
LINE 66: trouble for these gentlemen, if in defending himself he sought to enjoy
LINE 67: his last glimmer of life. He started walking, which pleased the
LINE 68: gentlemen and some of their pleasure conveyed itself to him. Now they
LINE 69: permitted him to decide which direction they took, and he decided to
LINE 70: take the direction that followed the young woman in front of them, not
LINE 71: so much because he wanted to catch up with her, nor even because he
LINE 72: wanted to keep her in sight for as long as possible, but only so that
LINE 73: he would not forget the reproach she represented for him. "The only
LINE 74: thing I can do now," he said to himself, and his thought was confirmed
LINE 75: by the equal length of his own steps with the steps of the two others,
LINE 76: "the only thing I can do now is keep my common sense and do what's
LINE 77: needed right till the end. I always wanted to go at the world and try
LINE 78: and do too much, and even to do it for something that was not too
LINE 79: cheap. That was wrong of me. Should I now show them I learned nothing
LINE 80: from facing trial for a year? Should I go out like someone stupid?
LINE 81: Should I let anyone say, after I'm gone, that at the start of the
LINE 82: proceedings I wanted to end them, and that now that they've ended I want
LINE 83: to start them again? I don't want anyone to say that. I'm grateful they
LINE 84: sent these unspeaking, uncomprehending men to go with me on this
LINE 85: journey, and that it's been left up to me to say what's necessary."
LINE 86: Meanwhile, the young woman had turned off into a side street, but K.
LINE 87: could do without her now and let his companions lead him. All three of
LINE 88: them now, in complete agreement, went over a bridge in the light of the
LINE 89: moon, the two gentlemen were willing to yield to each little movement
LINE 90: made by K. as he moved slightly towards the edge and directed the group
LINE 91: in that direction as a single unit. The moonlight glittered and
LINE 92: quivered in the water, which divided itself around a small island
LINE 93: covered in a densely-piled mass of foliage and trees and bushes.
LINE 94: Beneath them, now invisible, there were gravel paths with comfortable
LINE 95: benches where K. had stretched himself out on many summer's days. "I
LINE 96: didn't actually want to stop here," he said to his companions, shamed by
LINE 97: their compliance with his wishes. Behind K.'s back one of them seemed
LINE 98: to quietly criticise the other for the misunderstanding about stopping,
LINE 99: and then they went on. They went on up through several streets where
LINE 100: policemen were walking or standing here and there; some in the distance
LINE 101: and then some very close. One of them with a bushy moustache, his hand
LINE 102: on the grip of his sword, seemed to have some purpose in approaching
LINE 103: the group, which was hardly unsuspicious. The two gentlemen stopped,
LINE 104: the policeman seemed about to open his mouth, and then K. drove his
LINE 105: group forcefully forward. Several times he looked back cautiously to see
LINE 106: if the policeman was following; but when they had a corner between
LINE 107: themselves and the policeman K. began to run, and the two gentlemen,
LINE 108: despite being seriously short of breath, had to run with him.
LINE 109: In this way they quickly left the built up area and found themselves in
LINE 110: the fields which, in this part of town, began almost without any
LINE 111: transition zone. There was a quarry, empty and abandoned, near a
LINE 112: building which was still like those in the city. Here the men stopped,
LINE 113: perhaps because this had always been their destination or perhaps
LINE 114: because they were too exhausted to run any further. Here they released
LINE 115: their hold on K., who just waited in silence, and took their top hats
LINE 116: off while they looked round the quarry and wiped the sweat off their
LINE 117: brows with their handkerchiefs. The moonlight lay everywhere with the
LINE 118: natural peace that is granted to no other light.
LINE 119: After exchanging a few courtesies about who was to carry out the next
LINE 120: tasks--the gentlemen did not seem to have been allocated specific
LINE 121: functions--one of them went to K. and took his coat, his waistcoat, and
LINE 122: finally his shirt off him. K. made an involuntary shiver, at which the
LINE 123: gentleman gave him a gentle, reassuring tap on the back. Then he
LINE 124: carefully folded the things up as if they would still be needed, even
LINE 125: if not in the near future. He did not want to expose K. to the chilly
LINE 126: night air without moving though, so he took him under the arm and
LINE 127: walked up and down with him a little way while the other gentleman
LINE 128: looked round the quarry for a suitable place. When he had found it he
LINE 129: made a sign and the other gentleman escorted him there. It was near the
LINE 130: rockface, there was a stone lying there that had broken loose. The
LINE 131: gentlemen sat K. down on the ground, leant him against the stone and
LINE 132: settled his head down on the top of it. Despite all the effort they
LINE 133: went to, and despite all the co-operation shown by K., his demeanour
LINE 134: seemed very forced and hard to believe. So one of the gentlemen asked
LINE 135: the other to grant him a short time while he put K. in position by
LINE 136: himself, but even that did nothing to make it better. In the end they
LINE 137: left K. in a position that was far from the best of the ones they had
LINE 138: tried so far. Then one of the gentlemen opened his frock coat and from a
LINE 139: sheath hanging on a belt stretched across his waistcoat he withdrew a
LINE 140: long, thin, double-edged butcher's knife which he held up in the light
LINE 141: to test its sharpness. The repulsive courtesies began once again, one of
LINE 142: them passed the knife over K. to the other, who then passed it back over
LINE 143: K. to the first. K. now knew it would be his duty to take the knife as
LINE 144: it passed from hand to hand above him and thrust it into himself. But
LINE 145: he did not do it, instead he twisted his neck, which was still free,
LINE 146: and looked around. He was not able to show his full worth, was not able
LINE 147: to take all the work from the official bodies, he lacked the rest of
LINE 148: the strength he needed and this final shortcoming was the fault of
LINE 149: whoever had denied it to him. As he looked round, he saw the top floor
LINE 150: of the building next to the quarry. He saw how a light flickered on and
LINE 151: the two halves of a window opened out, somebody, made weak and thin by
LINE 152: the height and the distance, leant suddenly far out from it and
LINE 153: stretched his arms out even further. Who was that? A friend? A good
LINE 154: person? Somebody who was taking part? Somebody who wanted to help? Was
LINE 155: he alone? Was it everyone? Would anyone help? Were there objections that
LINE 156: had been forgotten? There must have been some. The logic cannot be
LINE 157: refuted, but someone who wants to live will not resist it. Where was the
LINE 158: judge he'd never seen? Where was the high court he had never reached? He
LINE 159: raised both hands and spread out all his fingers.
LINE 160: But the hands of one of the gentleman were laid on K.'s throat, while
LINE 161: the other pushed the knife deep into his heart and twisted it there,
LINE 162: twice. As his eyesight failed, K. saw the two gentlemen cheek by cheek,
LINE 163: close in front of his face, watching the result. "Like a dog!" he said,
LINE 164: it was as if the shame of it should outlive him.