LINE 1: The whip-man
LINE 2: One evening, a few days later, K. was walking along one of the corridors
LINE 3: that separated his office from the main stairway--he was nearly the last
LINE 4: one to leave for home that evening, there remained only a couple of
LINE 5: workers in the light of a single bulb in the dispatch department--when
LINE 6: he heard a sigh from behind a door which he had himself never opened but
LINE 7: which he had always thought just led into a junk room. He stood in
LINE 8: amazement and listened again to establish whether he might not be
LINE 9: mistaken. For a while there was silence, but then came some more sighs.
LINE 10: His first thought was to fetch one of the servitors, it might well have
LINE 11: been worth having a witness present, but then he was taken by an
LINE 12: uncontrollable curiosity that make him simply yank the door open. It
LINE 13: was, as he had thought, a junk room. Old, unusable forms, empty stone
LINE 14: ink-bottles lay scattered behind the entrance. But in the cupboard-like
LINE 15: room itself stood three men, crouching under the low ceiling. A candle
LINE 16: fixed on a shelf gave them light. "What are you doing here?" asked K.
LINE 17: quietly, but crossly and without thinking. One of the men was clearly in
LINE 18: charge, and attracted attention by being dressed in a kind of dark
LINE 19: leather costume which left his neck and chest and his arms exposed. He
LINE 20: did not answer. But the other two called out, "Mr. K.! We're to be
LINE 21: beaten because you made a complaint about us to the examining judge."
LINE 22: And now, K. finally realised that it was actually the two policemen,
LINE 23: Franz and Willem, and that the third man held a cane in his hand with
LINE 24: which to beat them. "Well," said K., staring at them, "I didn't make any
LINE 25: complaint, I only said what took place in my home. And your behaviour
LINE 26: was not entirely unobjectionable, after all." "Mr. K.," said Willem,
LINE 27: while Franz clearly tried to shelter behind him as protection from the
LINE 28: third man, "if you knew how badly we get paid you wouldn't think so
LINE 29: badly of us. I've got a family to feed, and Franz here wanted to get
LINE 30: married, you just have to get more money where you can, you can't do it
LINE 31: just by working hard, not however hard you try. I was sorely tempted by
LINE 32: your fine clothes, policemen aren't allowed to do that sort of thing,
LINE 33: course they aren't, and it wasn't right of us, but it's tradition that
LINE 34: the clothes go to the officers, that's how it's always been, believe me;
LINE 35: and it's understandable too, isn't it, what can things like that mean
LINE 36: for anyone unlucky enough to be arrested. But if he starts talking about
LINE 37: it openly then the punishment has to follow." "I didn't know about any
LINE 38: of this that you've been telling me, and I made no sort of request that
LINE 39: you be punished, I was simply acting on principle." "Franz," said
LINE 40: Willem, turning to the other policeman, "didn't I tell you that the
LINE 41: gentleman didn't say he wanted us to be punished. Now you can hear for
LINE 42: yourself, he didn't even know we'd have to be punished." "Don't you let
LINE 43: them persuade you, talking like that," said the third man to K., "this
LINE 44: punishment is both just and unavoidable." "Don't listen to him," said
LINE 45: Willem, interrupting himself only to quickly bring his hand to his mouth
LINE 46: when it had received a stroke of the cane, "we're only being punished
LINE 47: because you made a complaint against us. Nothing would have happened to
LINE 48: us otherwise, not even if they'd found out what we'd done. Can you call
LINE 49: that justice? Both of us, me especially, we'd proved our worth as good
LINE 50: police officers over a long period--you've got to admit yourself that as
LINE 51: far as official work was concerned we did the job well--things looked
LINE 52: good for us, we had prospects, it's quite certain that we would've been
LINE 53: made whip-men too, like this one, only he had the luck not to have
LINE 54: anyone make a complaint about him, as you really don't get many
LINE 55: complaints like that. Only that's all finished now, Mr. K., our careers
LINE 56: are at an end, we're going to have to do work now that's far inferior to
LINE 57: police work and besides all this we're going to get this terrible,
LINE 58: painful beating." "Can the cane really cause so much pain, then?" asked
LINE 59: K., testing the cane that the whip-man swang in front of him. "We're
LINE 60: going to have to strip off totally naked," said Willem. "Oh, I see,"
LINE 61: said K., looking straight at the whip-man, his skin was burned brown
LINE 62: like a sailor's, and his face showed health and vigour. "Is there then
LINE 63: no possibility of sparing these two their beating?" he asked him. "No,"
LINE 64: said the whip-man, shaking his head with a laugh. "Get undressed!" he
LINE 65: ordered the policemen. And to K. he said, "You shouldn't believe
LINE 66: everything they tell you, it's the fear of being beaten, it's already
LINE 67: made them a bit weak in the head. This one here, for instance," he
LINE 68: pointed at Willem, "all that he told you about his career prospects,
LINE 69: it's just ridiculous. Look at him, look how fat he is--the first strokes
LINE 70: of the cane will just get lost in all that fat. Do you know what it is
LINE 71: that's made him so fat. He's in the habit of, everyone that gets
LINE 72: arrested by him, he eats their breakfast. Didn't he eat up your
LINE 73: breakfast? Yeah, I thought as much. But a man with a belly like that
LINE 74: can't be made into a whip-man and never will be, that is quite out of
LINE 75: the question." "There are whip-men like that," Willem insisted, who had
LINE 76: just released the belt of this trousers. "No," said the whip-man,
LINE 77: striking him such a blow with the cane on his neck that it made him
LINE 78: wince, "you shouldn't be listening to this, just get undressed." "I
LINE 79: would make it well worth your while if you would let them go," said K.,
LINE 80: and without looking at the whip-man again--as such matters are best
LINE 81: carried on with both pairs of eyes turned down--he pulled out his
LINE 82: wallet. "And then you'd try and put in a complaint against me, too,"
LINE 83: said the whip-man, "and get me flogged. No, no!" "Now, do be
LINE 84: reasonable," said K., "if I had wanted to get these two punished I would
LINE 85: not now be trying to buy their freedom, would I? I could simply close
LINE 86: the door here behind me, go home and see or hear nothing more of it. But
LINE 87: that's not what I'm doing, it really is of much more importance to me to
LINE 88: let them go free; if I had realised they would be punished, or even that
LINE 89: they might be punished, I would never have named them in the first place
LINE 90: as they are not the ones I hold responsible. It's the organisation
LINE 91: that's to blame, the high officials are the ones to blame." "That's how
LINE 92: it is!" shouted the policemen, who then immediately received another
LINE 93: blow on their backs, which were by now exposed. "If you had a senior
LINE 94: judge here beneath your stick," said K., pressing down the cane as he
LINE 95: spoke to stop it being raised once more, "I really would do nothing to
LINE 96: stop you, on the contrary, I would even pay you money to give you all
LINE 97: the more strength." "Yeah, that's all very plausible, what you're saying
LINE 98: there," said the whip-man, "only I'm not the sort of person you can
LINE 99: bribe. It's my job to flog people, so I flog them." Franz, the
LINE 100: policeman, had been fairly quiet so far, probably in expectation of a
LINE 101: good result from K.'s intervention, but now he stepped forward to the
LINE 102: door wearing just his trousers, knelt down hanging on to K.'s arm and
LINE 103: whispered, "Even if you can't get mercy shown for both of us, at least
LINE 104: try and get me set free. Willem is older than me, he's less sensitive
LINE 105: than me in every way, he even got a light beating a couple of years
LINE 106: ago, but my record's still clean, I only did things the way I did
LINE 107: because Willem led me on to it, he's been my teacher both for good and
LINE 108: bad. Down in front of the bank my poor bride is waiting for me at the
LINE 109: entrance, I'm so ashamed of myself, it's pitiful." His face was flowing
LINE 110: over with tears, and he wiped it dry on K.'s coat. "I'm not going to
LINE 111: wait any longer," said the whip-man, taking hold of the cane in both
LINE 112: hands and laying in to Franz while Willem cowered back in a corner and
LINE 113: looked on secretly, not even daring to turn his head. Then, the sudden
LINE 114: scream that shot out from Franz was long and irrevocable, it seemed to
LINE 115: come not from a human being but from an instrument that was being
LINE 116: tortured, the whole corridor rang with it, it must have been heard by
LINE 117: everyone in the building. "Don't shout like that!", called out K.,
LINE 118: unable to prevent himself, and, as he looked anxiously in the direction
LINE 119: from which the servitor would come, he gave Franz a shove, not hard, but
LINE 120: hard enough for him to fall down unconscious, clawing at the ground with
LINE 121: his hands by reflex; he still did not avoid being hit; the rod still
LINE 122: found him on the floor; the tip of the rod swang regularly up and down
LINE 123: while he rolled to and fro under its blows. And now one of the servitors
LINE 124: appeared in the distance, with another a few steps behind him. K. had
LINE 125: quickly thrown the door shut, gone over to one of the windows
LINE 126: overlooking the yard and opened it. The screams had completely stopped.
LINE 127: So that the servitor wouldn't come in, he called out, "It's only me!"
LINE 128: "Good evening, chief clerk," somebody called back. "Is there anything
LINE 129: wrong?" "No, no," answered K., "it's only a dog yelping in the yard."
LINE 130: There was no sound from the servitors so he added, "You can go back to
LINE 131: what you were doing." He did not want to become involved with a
LINE 132: conversation with them, and so he leant out of the window. A little
LINE 133: while later, when he looked out in the corridor, they had already gone.
LINE 134: Now, K. remained at the window, he did not dare go back into the junk
LINE 135: room, and he did not want to go home either. The yard he looked down
LINE 136: into was small and rectangular, all around it were offices, all the
LINE 137: windows were now dark and only those at the very top caught a reflection
LINE 138: of the moon. K. tried hard to see into the darkness of one corner of the
LINE 139: yard, where a few handcarts had been left behind one another. He felt
LINE 140: anguish at not having been able to prevent the flogging, but that was
LINE 141: not his fault, if Franz had not screamed like that--clearly it must have
LINE 142: caused a great deal of pain but it's important to maintain control of
LINE 143: oneself at important moments--if Franz had not screamed then it was at
LINE 144: least highly probable that K. would have been able to dissuade the
LINE 145: whip-man. If all the junior officers were contemptible why would the
LINE 146: whip-man, whose position was the most inhumane of all, be any exception,
LINE 147: and K. had noticed very clearly how his eyes had lit up when he saw the
LINE 148: banknotes, he had obviously only seemed serious about the flogging to
LINE 149: raise the level of the bribe a little. And K. had not been ungenerous,
LINE 150: he really had wanted to get the policemen freed; if he really had now
LINE 151: begun to do something against the degeneracy of the court then it was a
LINE 152: matter of course that he would have to do something here as well. But of
LINE 153: course, it became impossible for him to do anything as soon as Franz
LINE 154: started screaming. K. could not possibly have let the junior bank staff,
LINE 155: and perhaps even all sorts of other people, come along and catch him by
LINE 156: surprise as he haggled with those people in the junk room. Nobody could
LINE 157: really expect that sort of sacrifice of him. If that had been his
LINE 158: intention then it would almost have been easier, K. would have taken
LINE 159: his own clothes off and offered himself to the whip-man in the
LINE 160: policemen's place. The whip-man would certainly not have accepted this
LINE 161: substitution anyway, as in that way he would have seriously violated his
LINE 162: duty without gaining any benefit. He would most likely have violated his
LINE 163: duty twice over, as court employees were probably under orders not to
LINE 164: cause any harm to K. while he was facing charges, although there may
LINE 165: have been special conditions in force here. However things stood, K. was
LINE 166: able to do no more than throw the door shut, even though that would
LINE 167: still do nothing to remove all the dangers he faced. It was regrettable
LINE 168: that he had given Franz a shove, and it could only be excused by the
LINE 169: heat of the moment.
LINE 170: In the distance, he heard the steps of the servitors; he did not want
LINE 171: them to be too aware of his presence, so he closed the window and
LINE 172: walked towards the main staircase. At the door of the junk room he
LINE 173: stopped and listened for a little while. All was silent. The two
LINE 174: policemen were entirely at the whip-man's mercy; he could have beaten
LINE 175: them to death. K. reached his hand out for the door handle but drew it
LINE 176: suddenly back. He was no longer in any position to help anyone, and the
LINE 177: servitors would soon be back; he did, though, promise himself that he
LINE 178: would raise the matter again with somebody and see that, as far as it
LINE 179: was in his power, those who really were guilty, the high officials whom
LINE 180: nobody had so far dared point out to him, received their due punishment.
LINE 181: As he went down the main stairway at the front of the bank, he looked
LINE 182: carefully round at everyone who was passing, but there was no girl to be
LINE 183: seen who might have been waiting for somebody, not even within some
LINE 184: distance from the bank. Franz's claim that his bride was waiting for him
LINE 185: was thus shown to be a lie, albeit one that was forgivable and intended
LINE 186: only to elicit more sympathy.
LINE 187: The policemen were still on K.'s mind all through the following day; he
LINE 188: was unable to concentrate on his work and had to stay in his office a
LINE 189: little longer than the previous day so that he could finish it. On the
LINE 190: way home, as he passed by the junk room again, he opened its door as if
LINE 191: that had been his habit. Instead of the darkness he expected, he saw
LINE 192: everything unchanged from the previous evening, and did not know how he
LINE 193: should respond. Everything was exactly the same as he had seen it when
LINE 194: he had opened the door the previous evening. The forms and bottles of
LINE 195: ink just inside the doorway, the whip-man with his cane, the two
LINE 196: policemen, still undressed, the candle on the shelf, and the two
LINE 197: policemen began to wail and call out "Mr. K.!" K. slammed the door
LINE 198: immediately shut, and even thumped on it with his fists as if that
LINE 199: would shut it all the firmer. Almost in tears, he ran to the servitors
LINE 200: working quietly at the copying machine. "Go and get that junk room
LINE 201: cleared out!" he shouted, and, in amazement, they stopped what they were
LINE 202: doing. "It should have been done long ago, we're sinking in dirt!" They
LINE 203: would be able to do the job the next day, K. nodded, it was too late in
LINE 204: the evening to make them do it there and then as he had originally
LINE 205: intended. He sat down briefly in order to keep them near him for a
LINE 206: little longer, looked through a few of the copies to give the impression
LINE 207: that he was checking them and then, as he saw that they would not dare
LINE 208: to leave at the same time as himself, went home tired and with his mind
LINE 209: numb.