LINE 1: Mr. Bennet was among the earliest of those who waited on Mr. Bingley. He
LINE 2: had always intended to visit him, though to the last always assuring his
LINE 3: wife that he should not go; and till the evening after the visit was
LINE 4: paid, she had no knowledge of it. It was then disclosed in the following
LINE 5: manner. Observing his second daughter employed in trimming a hat, he
LINE 6: suddenly addressed her with,
LINE 7: "I hope Mr. Bingley will like it Lizzy."
LINE 8: "We are not in a way to know _what_ Mr. Bingley likes," said her mother
LINE 9: resentfully, "since we are not to visit."
LINE 10: "But you forget, mama," said Elizabeth, "that we shall meet him at the
LINE 11: assemblies, and that Mrs. Long has promised to introduce him."
LINE 12: "I do not believe Mrs. Long will do any such thing. She has two nieces
LINE 13: of her own. She is a selfish, hypocritical woman, and I have no opinion
LINE 14: of her."
LINE 15: "No more have I," said Mr. Bennet; "and I am glad to find that you do
LINE 16: not depend on her serving you."
LINE 17: Mrs. Bennet deigned not to make any reply; but unable to contain
LINE 18: herself, began scolding one of her daughters.
LINE 19: "Don't keep coughing so, Kitty, for heaven's sake! Have a little
LINE 20: compassion on my nerves. You tear them to pieces."
LINE 21: "Kitty has no discretion in her coughs," said her father; "she times
LINE 22: them ill."
LINE 23: "I do not cough for my own amusement," replied Kitty fretfully.
LINE 24: "When is your next ball to be, Lizzy?"
LINE 25: "To-morrow fortnight."
LINE 26: "Aye, so it is," cried her mother, "and Mrs. Long does not come back
LINE 27: till the day before; so, it will be impossible for her to introduce him,
LINE 28: for she will not know him herself."
LINE 29: "Then, my dear, you may have the advantage of your friend, and introduce
LINE 30: Mr. Bingley to _her_."
LINE 31: "Impossible, Mr. Bennet, impossible, when I am not acquainted with him
LINE 32: myself; how can you be so teazing?"
LINE 33: "I honour your circumspection. A fortnight's acquaintance is certainly
LINE 34: very little. One cannot know what a man really is by the end of a
LINE 35: fortnight. But if _we_ do not venture, somebody else will; and after
LINE 36: all, Mrs. Long and her nieces must stand their chance; and therefore, as
LINE 37: she will think it an act of kindness, if you decline the office, I will
LINE 38: take it on myself."
LINE 39: The girls stared at their father. Mrs. Bennet said only, "Nonsense,
LINE 40: nonsense!"
LINE 41: "What can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation?" cried he. "Do
LINE 42: you consider the forms of introduction, and the stress that is laid on
LINE 43: them, as nonsense? I cannot quite agree with you _there_. What say you,
LINE 44: Mary? for you are a young lady of deep reflection I know, and read great
LINE 45: books, and make extracts."
LINE 46: Mary wished to say something very sensible, but knew not how.
LINE 47: "While Mary is adjusting her ideas," he continued, "let us return to Mr.
LINE 48: Bingley."
LINE 49: "I am sick of Mr. Bingley," cried his wife.
LINE 50: "I am sorry to hear _that_; but why did not you tell me so before? If I
LINE 51: had known as much this morning, I certainly would not have called on
LINE 52: him. It is very unlucky; but as I have actually paid the visit, we
LINE 53: cannot escape the acquaintance now."
LINE 54: The astonishment of the ladies was just what he wished; that of Mrs.
LINE 55: Bennet perhaps surpassing the rest; though when the first tumult of joy
LINE 56: was over, she began to declare that it was what she had expected all the
LINE 57: while.
LINE 58: "How good it was in you, my dear Mr. Bennet! But I knew I should
LINE 59: persuade you at last. I was sure you loved your girls too well to
LINE 60: neglect such an acquaintance. Well, how pleased I am! and it is such a
LINE 61: good joke, too, that you should have gone this morning, and never said
LINE 62: a word about it till now."
LINE 63: "Now, Kitty, you may cough as much as you chuse," said Mr. Bennet; and,
LINE 64: as he spoke, he left the room, fatigued with the raptures of his wife.
LINE 65: "What an excellent father you have, girls," said she, when the door was
LINE 66: shut. "I do not know how you will ever make him amends for his kindness;
LINE 67: or me either, for that matter. At our time of life, it is not so
LINE 68: pleasant I can tell you, to be making new acquaintance every day; but
LINE 69: for your sakes, we would do any thing. Lydia, my love, though you _are_
LINE 70: the youngest, I dare say Mr. Bingley will dance with you at the next
LINE 71: ball."
LINE 72: "Oh!" said Lydia stoutly, "I am not afraid; for though I _am_ the
LINE 73: youngest, I'm the tallest."
LINE 74: The rest of the evening was spent in conjecturing how soon he would
LINE 75: return Mr. Bennet's visit, and determining when they should ask him to
LINE 76: dinner.