LINE 1: When the ladies removed after dinner, Elizabeth ran up to her sister,
LINE 2: and seeing her well guarded from cold, attended her into the
LINE 3: drawing-room; where she was welcomed by her two friends with many
LINE 4: professions of pleasure; and Elizabeth had never seen them so agreeable
LINE 5: as they were during the hour which passed before the gentlemen appeared.
LINE 6: Their powers of conversation were considerable. They could describe an
LINE 7: entertainment with accuracy, relate an anecdote with humour, and laugh
LINE 8: at their acquaintance with spirit.
LINE 9: But when the gentlemen entered, Jane was no longer the first object.
LINE 10: Miss Bingley's eyes were instantly turned towards Darcy, and she had
LINE 11: something to say to him before he had advanced many steps. He addressed
LINE 12: himself directly to Miss Bennet, with a polite congratulation; Mr. Hurst
LINE 13: also made her a slight bow, and said he was "very glad;" but diffuseness
LINE 14: and warmth remained for Bingley's salutation. He was full of joy and
LINE 15: attention. The first half hour was spent in piling up the fire, lest she
LINE 16: should suffer from the change of room; and she removed at his desire to
LINE 17: the other side of the fire-place, that she might be farther from the
LINE 18: door. He then sat down by her, and talked scarcely to any one else.
LINE 19: Elizabeth, at work in the opposite corner, saw it all with great
LINE 20: delight.
LINE 21: When tea was over, Mr. Hurst reminded his sister-in-law of the
LINE 22: card-table--but in vain. She had obtained private intelligence that Mr.
LINE 23: Darcy did not wish for cards; and Mr. Hurst soon found even his open
LINE 24: petition rejected. She assured him that no one intended to play, and the
LINE 25: silence of the whole party on the subject, seemed to justify her. Mr.
LINE 26: Hurst had therefore nothing to do, but to stretch himself on one of the
LINE 27: sophas and go to sleep. Darcy took up a book; Miss Bingley did the same;
LINE 28: and Mrs. Hurst, principally occupied in playing with her bracelets and
LINE 29: rings, joined now and then in her brother's conversation with Miss
LINE 30: Bennet.
LINE 31: Miss Bingley's attention was quite as much engaged in watching Mr.
LINE 32: Darcy's progress through _his_ book, as in reading her own; and she was
LINE 33: perpetually either making some inquiry, or looking at his page. She
LINE 34: could not win him, however, to any conversation; he merely answered her
LINE 35: question, and read on. At length, quite exhausted by the attempt to be
LINE 36: amused with her own book, which she had only chosen because it was the
LINE 37: second volume of his, she gave a great yawn and said, "How pleasant it
LINE 38: is to spend an evening in this way! I declare after all there is no
LINE 39: enjoyment like reading! How much sooner one tires of any thing than of a
LINE 40: book!--When I have a house of my own, I shall be miserable if I have not
LINE 41: an excellent library."
LINE 42: No one made any reply. She then yawned again, threw aside her book, and
LINE 43: cast her eyes round the room in quest of some amusement; when hearing
LINE 44: her brother mentioning a ball to Miss Bennet, she turned suddenly
LINE 45: towards him and said,
LINE 46: "By the bye, Charles, are you really serious in meditating a dance at
LINE 47: Netherfield?--I would advise you, before you determine on it, to consult
LINE 48: the wishes of the present party; I am much mistaken if there are not
LINE 49: some among us to whom a ball would be rather a punishment than a
LINE 50: pleasure."
LINE 51: "If you mean Darcy," cried her brother, "he may go to bed, if he chuses,
LINE 52: before it begins--but as for the ball, it is quite a settled thing; and
LINE 53: as soon as Nicholls has made white soup enough I shall send round my
LINE 54: cards."
LINE 55: "I should like balls infinitely better," she replied, "if they were
LINE 56: carried on in a different manner; but there is something insufferably
LINE 57: tedious in the usual process of such a meeting. It would surely be much
LINE 58: more rational if conversation instead of dancing made the order of the
LINE 59: day."
LINE 60: "Much more rational, my dear Caroline, I dare say, but it would not be
LINE 61: near so much like a ball."
LINE 62: Miss Bingley made no answer; and soon afterwards got up and walked about
LINE 63: the room. Her figure was elegant, and she walked well;--but Darcy, at
LINE 64: whom it was all aimed, was still inflexibly studious. In the desperation
LINE 65: of her feelings she resolved on one effort more; and, turning to
LINE 66: Elizabeth, said,
LINE 67: "Miss Eliza Bennet, let me persuade you to follow my example, and take a
LINE 68: turn about the room.--I assure you it is very refreshing after sitting
LINE 69: so long in one attitude."
LINE 70: Elizabeth was surprised, but agreed to it immediately. Miss Bingley
LINE 71: succeeded no less in the real object of her civility; Mr. Darcy looked
LINE 72: up. He was as much awake to the novelty of attention in that quarter as
LINE 73: Elizabeth herself could be, and unconsciously closed his book. He was
LINE 74: directly invited to join their party, but he declined it, observing,
LINE 75: that he could imagine but two motives for their chusing to walk up and
LINE 76: down the room together, with either of which motives his joining them
LINE 77: would interfere. "What could he mean? she was dying to know what could
LINE 78: be his meaning"--and asked Elizabeth whether she could at all understand
LINE 79: him?
LINE 80: "Not at all," was her answer; "but depend upon it, he means to be severe
LINE 81: on us, and our surest way of disappointing him, will be to ask nothing
LINE 82: about it."
LINE 83: Miss Bingley, however, was incapable of disappointing Mr. Darcy in any
LINE 84: thing, and persevered therefore in requiring an explanation of his two
LINE 85: motives.
LINE 86: "I have not the smallest objection to explaining them," said he, as soon
LINE 87: as she allowed him to speak. "You either chuse this method of passing
LINE 88: the evening because you are in each other's confidence and have secret
LINE 89: affairs to discuss, or because you are conscious that your figures
LINE 90: appear to the greatest advantage in walking;--if the first, I should be
LINE 91: completely in your way;--and if the second, I can admire you much better
LINE 92: as I sit by the fire."
LINE 93: "Oh! shocking!" cried Miss Bingley. "I never heard any thing so
LINE 94: abominable. How shall we punish him for such a speech?"
LINE 95: "Nothing so easy, if you have but the inclination," said Elizabeth. "We
LINE 96: can all plague and punish one another. Teaze him--laugh at
LINE 97: him.--Intimate as you are, you must know how it is to be done."
LINE 98: "But upon my honour I do _not_. I do assure you that my intimacy has not
LINE 99: yet taught me _that_. Teaze calmness of temper and presence of mind! No,
LINE 100: no--I feel he may defy us there. And as to laughter, we will not expose
LINE 101: ourselves, if you please, by attempting to laugh without a subject. Mr.
LINE 102: Darcy may hug himself."
LINE 103: "Mr. Darcy is not to be laughed at!" cried Elizabeth. "That is an
LINE 104: uncommon advantage, and uncommon I hope it will continue, for it would
LINE 105: be a great loss to _me_ to have many such acquaintance. I dearly love a
LINE 106: laugh."
LINE 107: "Miss Bingley," said he, "has given me credit for more than can be. The
LINE 108: wisest and the best of men, nay, the wisest and best of their actions,
LINE 109: may be rendered ridiculous by a person whose first object in life is a
LINE 110: joke."
LINE 111: "Certainly," replied Elizabeth--"there are such people, but I hope I am
LINE 112: not one of _them_. I hope I never ridicule what is wise or good. Follies
LINE 113: and nonsense, whims and inconsistencies _do_ divert me, I own, and I
LINE 114: laugh at them whenever I can.--But these, I suppose, are precisely what
LINE 115: you are without."
LINE 116: "Perhaps that is not possible for any one. But it has been the study of
LINE 117: my life to avoid those weaknesses which often expose a strong
LINE 118: understanding to ridicule."
LINE 119: "Such as vanity and pride."
LINE 120: "Yes, vanity is a weakness indeed. But pride--where there is a real
LINE 121: superiority of mind, pride will be always under good regulation."
LINE 122: Elizabeth turned away to hide a smile.
LINE 123: "Your examination of Mr. Darcy is over, I presume," said Miss
LINE 124: Bingley;--"and pray what is the result?"
LINE 125: "I am perfectly convinced by it that Mr. Darcy has no defect. He owns it
LINE 126: himself without disguise."
LINE 127: "No"--said Darcy, "I have made no such pretension. I have faults enough,
LINE 128: but they are not, I hope, of understanding. My temper I dare not vouch
LINE 129: for.--It is I believe too little yielding--certainly too little for the
LINE 130: convenience of the world. I cannot forget the follies and vices of
LINE 131: others so soon as I ought, nor their offences against myself. My
LINE 132: feelings are not puffed about with every attempt to move them. My temper
LINE 133: would perhaps be called resentful.--My good opinion once lost is lost
LINE 134: for ever."
LINE 135: "_That_ is a failing indeed!"--cried Elizabeth. "Implacable resentment
LINE 136: _is_ a shade in a character. But you have chosen your fault well.--I
LINE 137: really cannot _laugh_ at it. You are safe from me."
LINE 138: "There is, I believe, in every disposition a tendency to some particular
LINE 139: evil, a natural defect, which not even the best education can overcome."
LINE 140: "And _your_ defect is a propensity to hate every body."
LINE 141: "And yours," he replied with a smile, "is wilfully to misunderstand
LINE 142: them."
LINE 143: "Do let us have a little music,"--cried Miss Bingley, tired of a
LINE 144: conversation in which she had no share.--"Louisa, you will not mind my
LINE 145: waking Mr. Hurst."
LINE 146: Her sister made not the smallest objection, and the piano-forte was
LINE 147: opened, and Darcy, after a few moments recollection, was not sorry for
LINE 148: it. He began to feel the danger of paying Elizabeth too much attention.