LINE 1: Within a short walk of Longbourn lived a family with whom the Bennets
LINE 2: were particularly intimate. Sir William Lucas had been formerly in trade
LINE 3: in Meryton, where he had made a tolerable fortune and risen to the
LINE 4: honour of knighthood by an address to the King, during his mayoralty.
LINE 5: The distinction had perhaps been felt too strongly. It had given him a
LINE 6: disgust to his business and to his residence in a small market town; and
LINE 7: quitting them both, he had removed with his family to a house about a
LINE 8: mile from Meryton, denominated from that period Lucas Lodge, where he
LINE 9: could think with pleasure of his own importance, and unshackled by
LINE 10: business, occupy himself solely in being civil to all the world. For
LINE 11: though elated by his rank, it did not render him supercilious; on the
LINE 12: contrary, he was all attention to every body. By nature inoffensive,
LINE 13: friendly and obliging, his presentation at St. James's had made him
LINE 14: courteous.
LINE 15: Lady Lucas was a very good kind of woman, not too clever to be a
LINE 16: valuable neighbour to Mrs. Bennet.--They had several children. The
LINE 17: eldest of them, a sensible, intelligent young woman, about twenty-seven,
LINE 18: was Elizabeth's intimate friend.
LINE 19: That the Miss Lucases and the Miss Bennets should meet to talk over a
LINE 20: ball was absolutely necessary; and the morning after the assembly
LINE 21: brought the former to Longbourn to hear and to communicate.
LINE 22: "_You_ began the evening well, Charlotte," said Mrs. Bennet with civil
LINE 23: self-command to Miss Lucas. "_You_ were Mr. Bingley's first choice."
LINE 24: "Yes;--but he seemed to like his second better."
LINE 25: "Oh!--you mean Jane, I suppose--because he danced with her twice. To be
LINE 26: sure that _did_ seem as if he admired her--indeed I rather believe he
LINE 27: _did_--I heard something about it--but I hardly know what--something
LINE 28: about Mr. Robinson."
LINE 29: "Perhaps you mean what I overheard between him and Mr. Robinson; did not
LINE 30: I mention it to you? Mr. Robinson's asking him how he liked our Meryton
LINE 31: assemblies, and whether he did not think there were a great many pretty
LINE 32: women in the room, and _which_ he thought the prettiest? and his
LINE 33: answering immediately to the last question--Oh! the eldest Miss Bennet
LINE 34: beyond a doubt, there cannot be two opinions on that point."
LINE 35: "Upon my word!--Well, that was very decided indeed--that does seem as
LINE 36: if----but however, it may all come to nothing you know."
LINE 37: "_My_ overhearings were more to the purpose than _yours_, Eliza," said
LINE 38: Charlotte. "Mr. Darcy is not so well worth listening to as his friend,
LINE 39: is he?--Poor Eliza!--to be only just _tolerable_."
LINE 40: "I beg you would not put it into Lizzy's head to be vexed by his
LINE 41: ill-treatment; for he is such a disagreeable man that it would be quite
LINE 42: a misfortune to be liked by him. Mrs. Long told me last night that he
LINE 43: sat close to her for half an hour without once opening his lips."
LINE 44: "Are you quite sure, Ma'am?--is not there a little mistake?" said
LINE 45: Jane.--"I certainly saw Mr. Darcy speaking to her."
LINE 46: "Aye--because she asked him at last how he liked Netherfield, and he
LINE 47: could not help answering her;--but she said he seemed very angry at
LINE 48: being spoke to."
LINE 49: "Miss Bingley told me," said Jane, "that he never speaks much unless
LINE 50: among his intimate acquaintance. With _them_ he is remarkably
LINE 51: agreeable."
LINE 52: "I do not believe a word of it, my dear. If he had been so very
LINE 53: agreeable he would have talked to Mrs. Long. But I can guess how it was;
LINE 54: every body says that he is ate up with pride, and I dare say he had
LINE 55: heard somehow that Mrs. Long does not keep a carriage, and had come to
LINE 56: the ball in a hack chaise."
LINE 57: "I do not mind his not talking to Mrs. Long," said Miss Lucas, "but I
LINE 58: wish he had danced with Eliza."
LINE 59: "Another time, Lizzy," said her mother, "I would not dance with _him_,
LINE 60: if I were you."
LINE 61: "I believe, Ma'am, I may safely promise you _never_ to dance with him."
LINE 62: "His pride," said Miss Lucas, "does not offend _me_ so much as pride
LINE 63: often does, because there is an excuse for it. One cannot wonder that so
LINE 64: very fine a young man, with family, fortune, every thing in his favour,
LINE 65: should think highly of himself. If I may so express it, he has a _right_
LINE 66: to be proud."
LINE 67: "That is very true," replied Elizabeth, "and I could easily forgive
LINE 68: _his_ pride, if he had not mortified _mine_."
LINE 69: "Pride," observed Mary, who piqued herself upon the solidity of her
LINE 70: reflections, "is a very common failing I believe. By all that I have
LINE 71: ever read, I am convinced that it is very common indeed, that human
LINE 72: nature is particularly prone to it, and that there are very few of us
LINE 73: who do not cherish a feeling of self-complacency on the score of some
LINE 74: quality or other, real or imaginary. Vanity and pride are different
LINE 75: things, though the words are often used synonimously. A person may be
LINE 76: proud without being vain. Pride relates more to our opinion of
LINE 77: ourselves, vanity to what we would have others think of us."
LINE 78: "If I were as rich as Mr. Darcy," cried a young Lucas who came with his
LINE 79: sisters, "I should not care how proud I was. I would keep a pack of
LINE 80: foxhounds, and drink a bottle of wine every day."
LINE 81: "Then you would drink a great deal more than you ought," said Mrs.
LINE 82: Bennet; "and if I were to see you at it I should take away your bottle
LINE 83: directly."
LINE 84: The boy protested that she should not; she continued to declare that she
LINE 85: would, and the argument ended only with the visit.