LINE 1: The discussion of Mr. Collins's offer was now nearly at an end, and
LINE 2: Elizabeth had only to suffer from the uncomfortable feelings necessarily
LINE 3: attending it, and occasionally from some peevish allusion of her mother.
LINE 4: As for the gentleman himself, _his_ feelings were chiefly expressed, not
LINE 5: by embarrassment or dejection, or by trying to avoid her, but by
LINE 6: stiffness of manner and resentful silence. He scarcely ever spoke to
LINE 7: her, and the assiduous attentions which he had been so sensible of
LINE 8: himself, were transferred for the rest of the day to Miss Lucas, whose
LINE 9: civility in listening to him, was a seasonable relief to them all, and
LINE 10: especially to her friend.
LINE 11: The morrow produced no abatement of Mrs. Bennet's ill humour or ill
LINE 12: health. Mr. Collins was also in the same state of angry pride. Elizabeth
LINE 13: had hoped that his resentment might shorten his visit, but his plan did
LINE 14: not appear in the least affected by it. He was always to have gone on
LINE 15: Saturday, and to Saturday he still meant to stay.
LINE 16: After breakfast, the girls walked to Meryton to inquire if Mr. Wickham
LINE 17: were returned, and to lament over his absence from the Netherfield ball.
LINE 18: He joined them on their entering the town and attended them to their
LINE 19: aunt's, where his regret and vexation, and the concern of every body was
LINE 20: well talked over.--To Elizabeth, however, he voluntarily acknowledged
LINE 21: that the necessity of his absence _had_ been self imposed.
LINE 22: "I found," said he, "as the time drew near, that I had better not meet
LINE 23: Mr. Darcy;--that to be in the same room, the same party with him for so
LINE 24: many hours together, might be more than I could bear, and that scenes
LINE 25: might arise unpleasant to more than myself."
LINE 26: She highly approved his forbearance, and they had leisure for a full
LINE 27: discussion of it, and for all the commendation which they civilly
LINE 28: bestowed on each other, as Wickham and another officer walked back with
LINE 29: them to Longbourn, and during the walk, he particularly attended to her.
LINE 30: His accompanying them was a double advantage; she felt all the
LINE 31: compliment it offered to herself, and it was most acceptable as an
LINE 32: occasion of introducing him to her father and mother.
LINE 33: Soon after their return, a letter was delivered to Miss Bennet; it came
LINE 34: from Netherfield, and was opened immediately. The envelope contained a
LINE 35: sheet of elegant, little, hot pressed paper, well covered with a lady's
LINE 36: fair, flowing hand; and Elizabeth saw her sister's countenance change as
LINE 37: she read it, and saw her dwelling intently on some particular passages.
LINE 38: Jane recollected herself soon, and putting the letter away, tried to
LINE 39: join with her usual cheerfulness in the general conversation; but
LINE 40: Elizabeth felt an anxiety on the subject which drew off her attention
LINE 41: even from Wickham; and no sooner had he and his companion taken leave,
LINE 42: than a glance from Jane invited her to follow her up stairs. When they
LINE 43: had gained their own room, Jane taking out the letter, said,
LINE 44: "This is from Caroline Bingley; what it contains, has surprised me a
LINE 45: good deal. The whole party have left Netherfield by this time, and are
LINE 46: on their way to town; and without any intention of coming back again.
LINE 47: You shall hear what she says."
LINE 48: She then read the first sentence aloud, which comprised the information
LINE 49: of their having just resolved to follow their brother to town directly,
LINE 50: and of their meaning to dine that day in Grosvenor street, where Mr.
LINE 51: Hurst had a house. The next was in these words. "I do not pretend to
LINE 52: regret any thing I shall leave in Hertfordshire, except your society, my
LINE 53: dearest friend; but we will hope at some future period, to enjoy many
LINE 54: returns of the delightful intercourse we have known, and in the mean
LINE 55: while may lessen the pain of separation by a very frequent and most
LINE 56: unreserved correspondence. I depend on you for that." To these high
LINE 57: flown expressions, Elizabeth listened with all the insensibility of
LINE 58: distrust; and though the suddenness of their removal surprised her, she
LINE 59: saw nothing in it really to lament; it was not to be supposed that their
LINE 60: absence from Netherfield would prevent Mr. Bingley's being there; and as
LINE 61: to the loss of their society, she was persuaded that Jane must soon
LINE 62: cease to regard it, in the enjoyment of his.
LINE 63: "It is unlucky," said she, after a short pause, "that you should not be
LINE 64: able to see your friends before they leave the country. But may we not
LINE 65: hope that the period of future happiness to which Miss Bingley looks
LINE 66: forward, may arrive earlier than she is aware, and that the delightful
LINE 67: intercourse you have known as friends, will be renewed with yet greater
LINE 68: satisfaction as sisters?--Mr. Bingley will not be detained in London by
LINE 69: them."
LINE 70: "Caroline decidedly says that none of the party will return into
LINE 71: Hertfordshire this winter. I will read it to you--
LINE 72: "When my brother left us yesterday, he imagined that the business which
LINE 73: took him to London, might be concluded in three or four days, but as we
LINE 74: are certain it cannot be so, and at the same time convinced that when
LINE 75: Charles gets to town, he will be in no hurry to leave it again, we have
LINE 76: determined on following him thither, that he may not be obliged to spend
LINE 77: his vacant hours in a comfortless hotel. Many of my acquaintance are
LINE 78: already there for the winter; I wish I could hear that you, my dearest
LINE 79: friend, had any intention of making one in the croud, but of that I
LINE 80: despair. I sincerely hope your Christmas in Hertfordshire may abound in
LINE 81: the gaieties which that season generally brings, and that your beaux
LINE 82: will be so numerous as to prevent your feeling the loss of the three, of
LINE 83: whom we shall deprive you."
LINE 84: "It is evident by this," added Jane, "that he comes back no more this
LINE 85: winter."
LINE 86: "It is only evident that Miss Bingley does not mean he _should_."
LINE 87: "Why will you think so? It must be his own doing.--He is his own master.
LINE 88: But you do not know _all_. I _will_ read you the passage which
LINE 89: particularly hurts me. I will have no reserves from _you_." "Mr. Darcy
LINE 90: is impatient to see his sister, and to confess the truth, _we_ are
LINE 91: scarcely less eager to meet her again. I really do not think Georgiana
LINE 92: Darcy has her equal for beauty, elegance, and accomplishments; and the
LINE 93: affection she inspires in Louisa and myself, is heightened into
LINE 94: something still more interesting, from the hope we dare to entertain of
LINE 95: her being hereafter our sister. I do not know whether I ever before
LINE 96: mentioned to you my feelings on this subject, but I will not leave the
LINE 97: country without confiding them, and I trust you will not esteem them
LINE 98: unreasonable. My brother admires her greatly already, he will have
LINE 99: frequent opportunity now of seeing her on the most intimate footing, her
LINE 100: relations all wish the connection as much as his own, and a sister's
LINE 101: partiality is not misleading me, I think, when I call Charles most
LINE 102: capable of engaging any woman's heart. With all these circumstances to
LINE 103: favour an attachment and nothing to prevent it, am I wrong, my dearest
LINE 104: Jane, in indulging the hope of an event which will secure the happiness
LINE 105: of so many?"
LINE 106: "What think you of _this_ sentence, my dear Lizzy?"--said Jane as she
LINE 107: finished it. "Is it not clear enough?--Does it not expressly declare
LINE 108: that Caroline neither expects nor wishes me to be her sister; that she
LINE 109: is perfectly convinced of her brother's indifference, and that if she
LINE 110: suspects the nature of my feelings for him, she means (most kindly!) to
LINE 111: put me on my guard? Can there be any other opinion on the subject?"
LINE 112: "Yes, there can; for mine is totally different.--Will you hear it?"
LINE 113: "Most willingly."
LINE 114: "You shall have it in few words. Miss Bingley sees that her brother is
LINE 115: in love with you, and wants him to marry Miss Darcy. She follows him to
LINE 116: town in the hope of keeping him there, and tries to persuade you that he
LINE 117: does not care about you."
LINE 118: Jane shook her head.
LINE 119: "Indeed, Jane, you ought to believe me.--No one who has ever seen you
LINE 120: together, can doubt his affection. Miss Bingley I am sure cannot. She is
LINE 121: not such a simpleton. Could she have seen half as much love in Mr. Darcy
LINE 122: for herself, she would have ordered her wedding clothes. But the case is
LINE 123: this. We are not rich enough, or grand enough for them; and she is the
LINE 124: more anxious to get Miss Darcy for her brother, from the notion that
LINE 125: when there has been _one_ intermarriage, she may have less trouble in
LINE 126: achieving a second; in which there is certainly some ingenuity, and I
LINE 127: dare say it would succeed, if Miss de Bourgh were out of the way. But,
LINE 128: my dearest Jane, you cannot seriously imagine that because Miss Bingley
LINE 129: tells you her brother greatly admires Miss Darcy, he is in the smallest
LINE 130: degree less sensible of _your_ merit than when he took leave of you on
LINE 131: Tuesday, or that it will be in her power to persuade him that instead of
LINE 132: being in love with you, he is very much in love with her friend."
LINE 133: "If we thought alike of Miss Bingley," replied Jane, "your
LINE 134: representation of all this, might make me quite easy. But I know the
LINE 135: foundation is unjust. Caroline is incapable of wilfully deceiving any
LINE 136: one; and all that I can hope in this case is, that she is deceived
LINE 137: herself."
LINE 138: "That is right.--You could not have started a more happy idea, since you
LINE 139: will not take comfort in mine. Believe her to be deceived by all means.
LINE 140: You have now done your duty by her, and must fret no longer."
LINE 141: "But, my dear sister, can I be happy, even supposing the best, in
LINE 142: accepting a man whose sisters and friends are all wishing him to marry
LINE 143: elsewhere?"
LINE 144: "You must decide for yourself," said Elizabeth, "and if upon mature
LINE 145: deliberation, you find that the misery of disobliging his two sisters is
LINE 146: more than equivalent to the happiness of being his wife, I advise you by
LINE 147: all means to refuse him."
LINE 148: "How can you talk so?"--said Jane faintly smiling,--"You must know that
LINE 149: though I should be exceedingly grieved at their disapprobation, I could
LINE 150: not hesitate."
LINE 151: "I did not think you would;--and that being the case, I cannot consider
LINE 152: your situation with much compassion."
LINE 153: "But if he returns no more this winter, my choice will never be
LINE 154: required. A thousand things may arise in six months!"
LINE 155: The idea of his returning no more Elizabeth treated with the utmost
LINE 156: contempt. It appeared to her merely the suggestion of Caroline's
LINE 157: interested wishes, and she could not for a moment suppose that those
LINE 158: wishes, however openly or artfully spoken, could influence a young man
LINE 159: so totally independent of every one.
LINE 160: She represented to her sister as forcibly as possible what she felt on
LINE 161: the subject, and had soon the pleasure of seeing its happy effect.
LINE 162: Jane's temper was not desponding, and she was gradually led to hope,
LINE 163: though the diffidence of affection sometimes overcame the hope, that
LINE 164: Bingley would return to Netherfield and answer every wish of her heart.
LINE 165: They agreed that Mrs. Bennet should only hear of the departure of the
LINE 166: family, without being alarmed on the score of the gentleman's conduct;
LINE 167: but even this partial communication gave her a great deal of concern,
LINE 168: and she bewailed it as exceedingly unlucky that the ladies should happen
LINE 169: to go away, just as they were all getting so intimate together. After
LINE 170: lamenting it however at some length, she had the consolation of thinking
LINE 171: that Mr. Bingley would be soon down again and soon dining at Longbourn,
LINE 172: and the conclusion of all was the comfortable declaration that, though
LINE 173: he had been invited only to a family dinner, she would take care to have
LINE 174: two full courses.