LINE 1: Mr. Collins was not left long to the silent contemplation of his
LINE 2: successful love; for Mrs. Bennet, having dawdled about in the vestibule
LINE 3: to watch for the end of the conference, no sooner saw Elizabeth open the
LINE 4: door and with quick step pass her towards the staircase, than she
LINE 5: entered the breakfast-room, and congratulated both him and herself in
LINE 6: warm terms on the happy prospect of their nearer connection. Mr. Collins
LINE 7: received and returned these felicitations with equal pleasure, and then
LINE 8: proceeded to relate the particulars of their interview, with the result
LINE 9: of which he trusted he had every reason to be satisfied, since the
LINE 10: refusal which his cousin had steadfastly given him would naturally flow
LINE 11: from her bashful modesty and the genuine delicacy of her character.
LINE 12: This information, however, startled Mrs. Bennet;--she would have been
LINE 13: glad to be equally satisfied that her daughter had meant to encourage
LINE 14: him by protesting against his proposals, but she dared not to believe
LINE 15: it, and could not help saying so.
LINE 16: "But depend upon it, Mr. Collins," she added, "that Lizzy shall be
LINE 17: brought to reason. I will speak to her about it myself directly. She is
LINE 18: a very headstrong foolish girl, and does not know her own interest; but
LINE 19: I will _make_ her know it."
LINE 20: "Pardon me for interrupting you, Madam," cried Mr. Collins; "but if she
LINE 21: is really headstrong and foolish, I know not whether she would
LINE 22: altogether be a very desirable wife to a man in my situation, who
LINE 23: naturally looks for happiness in the marriage state. If therefore she
LINE 24: actually persists in rejecting my suit, perhaps it were better not to
LINE 25: force her into accepting me, because if liable to such defects of
LINE 26: temper, she could not contribute much to my felicity."
LINE 27: "Sir, you quite misunderstand me," said Mrs. Bennet, alarmed. "Lizzy is
LINE 28: only headstrong in such matters as these. In every thing else she is as
LINE 29: good natured a girl as ever lived. I will go directly to Mr. Bennet, and
LINE 30: we shall very soon settle it with her, I am sure."
LINE 31: She would not give him time to reply, but hurrying instantly to her
LINE 32: husband, called out as she entered the library,
LINE 33: "Oh! Mr. Bennet, you are wanted immediately; we are all in an uproar.
LINE 34: You must come and make Lizzy marry Mr. Collins, for she vows she will
LINE 35: not have him, and if you do not make haste he will change his mind and
LINE 36: not have _her_."
LINE 37: Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered, and fixed them
LINE 38: on her face with a calm unconcern which was not in the least altered by
LINE 39: her communication.
LINE 40: "I have not the pleasure of understanding you," said he, when she had
LINE 41: finished her speech. "Of what are you talking?"
LINE 42: "Of Mr. Collins and Lizzy. Lizzy declares she will not have Mr. Collins,
LINE 43: and Mr. Collins begins to say that he will not have Lizzy."
LINE 44: "And what am I to do on the occasion?--It seems an hopeless business."
LINE 45: "Speak to Lizzy about it yourself. Tell her that you insist upon her
LINE 46: marrying him."
LINE 47: "Let her be called down. She shall hear my opinion."
LINE 48: Mrs. Bennet rang the bell, and Miss Elizabeth was summoned to the
LINE 49: library.
LINE 50: "Come here, child," cried her father as she appeared. "I have sent for
LINE 51: you on an affair of importance. I understand that Mr. Collins has made
LINE 52: you an offer of marriage. Is it true?" Elizabeth replied that it was.
LINE 53: "Very well--and this offer of marriage you have refused?"
LINE 54: "I have, Sir."
LINE 55: "Very well. We now come to the point. Your mother insists upon your
LINE 56: accepting it. Is not it so, Mrs. Bennet?"
LINE 57: "Yes, or I will never see her again."
LINE 58: "An unhappy alternative is before you, Elizabeth. From this day you must
LINE 59: be a stranger to one of your parents.--Your mother will never see you
LINE 60: again if you do _not_ marry Mr. Collins, and I will never see you again
LINE 61: if you _do_."
LINE 62: Elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a beginning;
LINE 63: but Mrs. Bennet, who had persuaded herself that her husband regarded the
LINE 64: affair as she wished, was excessively disappointed.
LINE 65: "What do you mean, Mr. Bennet, by talking in this way? You promised me
LINE 66: to _insist_ upon her marrying him."
LINE 67: "My dear," replied her husband, "I have two small favours to request.
LINE 68: First, that you will allow me the free use of my understanding on the
LINE 69: present occasion; and secondly, of my room. I shall be glad to have the
LINE 70: library to myself as soon as may be."
LINE 71: Not yet, however, in spite of her disappointment in her husband, did
LINE 72: Mrs. Bennet give up the point. She talked to Elizabeth again and again;
LINE 73: coaxed and threatened her by turns. She endeavoured to secure Jane in
LINE 74: her interest, but Jane with all possible mildness declined
LINE 75: interfering;--and Elizabeth sometimes with real earnestness and
LINE 76: sometimes with playful gaiety replied to her attacks. Though her manner
LINE 77: varied however, her determination never did.
LINE 78: Mr. Collins, meanwhile, was meditating in solitude on what had passed.
LINE 79: He thought too well of himself to comprehend on what motive his cousin
LINE 80: could refuse him; and though his pride was hurt, he suffered in no other
LINE 81: way. His regard for her was quite imaginary; and the possibility of her
LINE 82: deserving her mother's reproach prevented his feeling any regret.
LINE 83: While the family were in this confusion, Charlotte Lucas came to spend
LINE 84: the day with them. She was met in the vestibule by Lydia, who, flying to
LINE 85: her, cried in a half whisper, "I am glad you are come, for there is such
LINE 86: fun here!--What do you think has happened this morning?--Mr. Collins has
LINE 87: made an offer to Lizzy, and she will not have him."
LINE 88: Charlotte had hardly time to answer, before they were joined by Kitty,
LINE 89: who came to tell the same news, and no sooner had they entered the
LINE 90: breakfast-room, where Mrs. Bennet was alone, than she likewise began on
LINE 91: the subject, calling on Miss Lucas for her compassion, and entreating
LINE 92: her to persuade her friend Lizzy to comply with the wishes of all her
LINE 93: family. "Pray do, my dear Miss Lucas," she added in a melancholy tone,
LINE 94: "for nobody is on my side, nobody takes part with me, I am cruelly used,
LINE 95: nobody feels for my poor nerves."
LINE 96: Charlotte's reply was spared by the entrance of Jane and Elizabeth.
LINE 97: "Aye, there she comes," continued Mrs. Bennet, "looking as unconcerned
LINE 98: as may be, and caring no more for us than if we were at York, provided
LINE 99: she can have her own way.--But I tell you what, Miss Lizzy, if you take
LINE 100: it into your head to go on refusing every offer of marriage in this way,
LINE 101: you will never get a husband at all--and I am sure I do not know who is
LINE 102: to maintain you when your father is dead.--_I_ shall not be able to keep
LINE 103: you--and so I warn you.--I have done with you from this very day.--I
LINE 104: told you in the library, you know, that I should never speak to you
LINE 105: again, and you will find me as good as my word. I have no pleasure in
LINE 106: talking to undutiful children.--Not that I have much pleasure indeed in
LINE 107: talking to any body. People who suffer as I do from nervous complaints
LINE 108: can have no great inclination for talking. Nobody can tell what I
LINE 109: suffer!--But it is always so. Those who do not complain are never
LINE 110: pitied."
LINE 111: Her daughters listened in silence to this effusion, sensible that any
LINE 112: attempt to reason with or sooth her would only increase the irritation.
LINE 113: She talked on, therefore, without interruption from any of them till
LINE 114: they were joined by Mr. Collins, who entered with an air more stately
LINE 115: than usual, and on perceiving whom, she said to the girls,
LINE 116: "Now, I do insist upon it, that you, all of you, hold your tongues, and
LINE 117: let Mr. Collins and me have a little conversation together."
LINE 118: Elizabeth passed quietly out of the room, Jane and Kitty followed, but
LINE 119: Lydia stood her ground, determined to hear all she could; and Charlotte,
LINE 120: detained first by the civility of Mr. Collins, whose inquiries after
LINE 121: herself and all her family were very minute, and then by a little
LINE 122: curiosity, satisfied herself with walking to the window and pretending
LINE 123: not to hear. In a doleful voice Mrs. Bennet thus began the projected
LINE 124: conversation.--"Oh! Mr. Collins!"--
LINE 125: "My dear Madam," replied he, "let us be for ever silent on this point.
LINE 126: Far be it from me," he presently continued in a voice that marked his
LINE 127: displeasure, "to resent the behaviour of your daughter. Resignation to
LINE 128: inevitable evils is the duty of us all; the peculiar duty of a young man
LINE 129: who has been so fortunate as I have been in early preferment; and I
LINE 130: trust I am resigned. Perhaps not the less so from feeling a doubt of my
LINE 131: positive happiness had my fair cousin honoured me with her hand; for I
LINE 132: have often observed that resignation is never so perfect as when the
LINE 133: blessing denied begins to lose somewhat of its value in our estimation.
LINE 134: You will not, I hope, consider me as shewing any disrespect to your
LINE 135: family, my dear Madam, by thus withdrawing my pretensions to your
LINE 136: daughter's favour, without having paid yourself and Mr. Bennet the
LINE 137: compliment of requesting you to interpose your authority in my behalf.
LINE 138: My conduct may I fear be objectionable in having accepted my dismission
LINE 139: from your daughter's lips instead of your own. But we are all liable to
LINE 140: error. I have certainly meant well through the whole affair. My object
LINE 141: has been to secure an amiable companion for myself, with due
LINE 142: consideration for the advantage of all your family, and if my _manner_
LINE 143: has been at all reprehensible, I here beg leave to apologise."