LINE 1: "I hope, my dear," said Mr. Bennet to his wife, as they were at
LINE 2: breakfast the next morning, "that you have ordered a good dinner to-day,
LINE 3: because I have reason to expect an addition to our family party."
LINE 4: "Who do you mean, my dear? I know of nobody that is coming I am sure,
LINE 5: unless Charlotte Lucas should happen to call in, and I hope _my_ dinners
LINE 6: are good enough for her. I do not believe she often sees such at home."
LINE 7: "The person of whom I speak, is a gentleman and a stranger." Mrs.
LINE 8: Bennet's eyes sparkled.--"A gentleman and a stranger! It is Mr. Bingley
LINE 9: I am sure. Why Jane--you never dropt a word of this; you sly thing!
LINE 10: Well, I am sure I shall be extremely glad to see Mr. Bingley.--But--good
LINE 11: lord! how unlucky! there is not a bit of fish to be got to-day. Lydia,
LINE 12: my love, ring the bell. I must speak to Hill, this moment."
LINE 13: "It is _not_ Mr. Bingley," said her husband; "it is a person whom I
LINE 14: never saw in the whole course of my life."
LINE 15: This roused a general astonishment; and he had the pleasure of being
LINE 16: eagerly questioned by his wife and five daughters at once.
LINE 17: After amusing himself some time with their curiosity, he thus explained.
LINE 18: "About a month ago I received this letter, and about a fortnight ago I
LINE 19: answered it, for I thought it a case of some delicacy, and requiring
LINE 20: early attention. It is from my cousin, Mr. Collins, who, when I am dead,
LINE 21: may turn you all out of this house as soon as he pleases."
LINE 22: "Oh! my dear," cried his wife, "I cannot bear to hear that mentioned.
LINE 23: Pray do not talk of that odious man. I do think it is the hardest thing
LINE 24: in the world, that your estate should be entailed away from your own
LINE 25: children; and I am sure if I had been you, I should have tried long ago
LINE 26: to do something or other about it."
LINE 27: Jane and Elizabeth attempted to explain to her the nature of an entail.
LINE 28: They had often attempted it before, but it was a subject on which Mrs.
LINE 29: Bennet was beyond the reach of reason; and she continued to rail
LINE 30: bitterly against the cruelty of settling an estate away from a family of
LINE 31: five daughters, in favour of a man whom nobody cared anything about.
LINE 32: "It certainly is a most iniquitous affair," said Mr. Bennet, "and
LINE 33: nothing can clear Mr. Collins from the guilt of inheriting Longbourn.
LINE 34: But if you will listen to his letter, you may perhaps be a little
LINE 35: softened by his manner of expressing himself."
LINE 36: "No, that I am sure I shall not; and I think it was very impertinent of
LINE 37: him to write to you at all, and very hypocritical. I hate such false
LINE 38: friends. Why could not he keep on quarrelling with you, as his father
LINE 39: did before him?"
LINE 40: "Why, indeed, he does seem to have had some filial scruples on that
LINE 41: head, as you will hear."
LINE 42: _Hunsford, near Westerham, Kent,
LINE 43: 15th October._
LINE 44: DEAR SIR,
LINE 45: The disagreement subsisting between yourself and my late honoured
LINE 46: father, always gave me much uneasiness, and since I have had the
LINE 47: misfortune to lose him, I have frequently wished to heal the
LINE 48: breach; but for some time I was kept back by my own doubts, fearing
LINE 49: lest it might seem disrespectful to his memory for me to be on good
LINE 50: terms with any one, with whom it had always pleased him to be at
LINE 51: variance.--"There, Mrs. Bennet."--My mind however is now made up on
LINE 52: the subject, for having received ordination at Easter, I have been
LINE 53: so fortunate as to be distinguished by the patronage of the Right
LINE 54: Honourable Lady Catherine de Bourgh, widow of Sir Lewis de Bourgh,
LINE 55: whose bounty and beneficence has preferred me to the valuable
LINE 56: rectory of this parish, where it shall be my earnest endeavour to
LINE 57: demean myself with grateful respect towards her Ladyship, and be
LINE 58: ever ready to perform those rites and ceremonies which are
LINE 59: instituted by the Church of England. As a clergyman, moreover, I
LINE 60: feel it my duty to promote and establish the blessing of peace in
LINE 61: all families within the reach of my influence; and on these grounds
LINE 62: I flatter myself that my present overtures of good-will are highly
LINE 63: commendable, and that the circumstance of my being next in the
LINE 64: entail of Longbourn estate, will be kindly overlooked on your side,
LINE 65: and not lead you to reject the offered olive branch. I cannot be
LINE 66: otherwise than concerned at being the means of injuring your
LINE 67: amiable daughters, and beg leave to apologise for it, as well as to
LINE 68: assure you of my readiness to make them every possible amends,--but
LINE 69: of this hereafter. If you should have no objection to receive me
LINE 70: into your house, I propose myself the satisfaction of waiting on
LINE 71: you and your family, Monday, November 18th, by four o'clock, and
LINE 72: shall probably trespass on your hospitality till the Saturday
LINE 73: se'night following, which I can do without any inconvenience, as
LINE 74: Lady Catherine is far from objecting to my occasional absence on a
LINE 75: Sunday, provided that some other clergyman is engaged to do the
LINE 76: duty of the day. I remain, dear sir, with respectful compliments to
LINE 77: your lady and daughters, your well-wisher and friend,
LINE 78: WILLIAM COLLINS."
LINE 79: "At four o'clock, therefore, we may expect this peace-making gentleman,"
LINE 80: said Mr. Bennet, as he folded up the letter. "He seems to be a most
LINE 81: conscientious and polite young man, upon my word; and I doubt not will
LINE 82: prove a valuable acquaintance, especially if Lady Catherine should be so
LINE 83: indulgent as to let him come to us again."
LINE 84: "There is some sense in what he says about the girls however; and if he
LINE 85: is disposed to make them any amends, I shall not be the person to
LINE 86: discourage him."
LINE 87: "Though it is difficult," said Jane, "to guess in what way he can mean
LINE 88: to make us the atonement he thinks our due, the wish is certainly to his
LINE 89: credit."
LINE 90: Elizabeth was chiefly struck with his extraordinary deference for Lady
LINE 91: Catherine, and his kind intention of christening, marrying, and burying
LINE 92: his parishioners whenever it were required.
LINE 93: "He must be an oddity, I think," said she. "I cannot make him
LINE 94: out.--There is something very pompous in his style.--And what can he
LINE 95: mean by apologizing for being next in the entail?--We cannot suppose he
LINE 96: would help it, if he could.--Can he be a sensible man, sir?"
LINE 97: "No, my dear; I think not. I have great hopes of finding him quite the
LINE 98: reverse. There is a mixture of servility and self-importance in his
LINE 99: letter, which promises well. I am impatient to see him."
LINE 100: "In point of composition," said Mary, "his letter does not seem
LINE 101: defective. The idea of the olive branch perhaps is not wholly new, yet I
LINE 102: think it is well expressed."
LINE 103: To Catherine and Lydia, neither the letter nor its writer were in any
LINE 104: degree interesting. It was next to impossible that their cousin should
LINE 105: come in a scarlet coat, and it was now some weeks since they had
LINE 106: received pleasure from the society of a man in any other colour. As for
LINE 107: their mother, Mr. Collins's letter had done away much of her ill-will,
LINE 108: and she was preparing to see him with a degree of composure, which
LINE 109: astonished her husband and daughters.
LINE 110: Mr. Collins was punctual to his time, and was received with great
LINE 111: politeness by the whole family. Mr. Bennet indeed said little; but the
LINE 112: ladies were ready enough to talk, and Mr. Collins seemed neither in need
LINE 113: of encouragement, nor inclined to be silent himself. He was a tall,
LINE 114: heavy looking young man of five and twenty. His air was grave and
LINE 115: stately, and his manners were very formal. He had not been long seated
LINE 116: before he complimented Mrs. Bennet on having so fine a family of
LINE 117: daughters, said he had heard much of their beauty, but that, in this
LINE 118: instance, fame had fallen short of the truth; and added, that he did
LINE 119: not doubt her seeing them all in due time well disposed of in marriage.
LINE 120: This gallantry was not much to the taste of some of his hearers, but
LINE 121: Mrs. Bennet, who quarrelled with no compliments, answered most readily,
LINE 122: "You are very kind, sir, I am sure; and I wish with all my heart it may
LINE 123: prove so; for else they will be destitute enough. Things are settled so
LINE 124: oddly."
LINE 125: "You allude perhaps to the entail of this estate."
LINE 126: "Ah! sir, I do indeed. It is a grievous affair to my poor girls, you
LINE 127: must confess. Not that I mean to find fault with _you_, for such things
LINE 128: I know are all chance in this world. There is no knowing how estates
LINE 129: will go when once they come to be entailed."
LINE 130: "I am very sensible, madam, of the hardship to my fair cousins,--and
LINE 131: could say much on the subject, but that I am cautious of appearing
LINE 132: forward and precipitate. But I can assure the young ladies that I come
LINE 133: prepared to admire them. At present I will not say more, but perhaps
LINE 134: when we are better acquainted----"
LINE 135: He was interrupted by a summons to dinner; and the girls smiled on each
LINE 136: other. They were not the only objects of Mr. Collins's admiration. The
LINE 137: hall, the dining-room, and all its furniture were examined and praised;
LINE 138: and his commendation of every thing would have touched Mrs. Bennet's
LINE 139: heart, but for the mortifying supposition of his viewing it all as his
LINE 140: own future property. The dinner too in its turn was highly admired; and
LINE 141: he begged to know to which of his fair cousins, the excellence of its
LINE 142: cookery was owing. But here he was set right by Mrs. Bennet, who assured
LINE 143: him with some asperity that they were very well able to keep a good
LINE 144: cook, and that her daughters had nothing to do in the kitchen. He begged
LINE 145: pardon for having displeased her. In a softened tone she declared
LINE 146: herself not at all offended; but he continued to apologise for about a
LINE 147: quarter of an hour.