LINE 1: In consequence of an agreement between the sisters, Elizabeth wrote the
LINE 2: next morning to her mother, to beg that the carriage might be sent for
LINE 3: them in the course of the day. But Mrs. Bennet, who had calculated on
LINE 4: her daughters remaining at Netherfield till the following Tuesday, which
LINE 5: would exactly finish Jane's week, could not bring herself to receive
LINE 6: them with pleasure before. Her answer, therefore, was not propitious, at
LINE 7: least not to Elizabeth's wishes, for she was impatient to get home. Mrs.
LINE 8: Bennet sent them word that they could not possibly have the carriage
LINE 9: before Tuesday; and in her postscript it was added, that if Mr. Bingley
LINE 10: and his sister pressed them to stay longer, she could spare them very
LINE 11: well.--Against staying longer, however, Elizabeth was positively
LINE 12: resolved--nor did she much expect it would be asked; and fearful, on the
LINE 13: contrary, as being considered as intruding themselves needlessly long,
LINE 14: she urged Jane to borrow Mr. Bingley's carriage immediately, and at
LINE 15: length it was settled that their original design of leaving Netherfield
LINE 16: that morning should be mentioned, and the request made.
LINE 17: The communication excited many professions of concern; and enough was
LINE 18: said of wishing them to stay at least till the following day to work on
LINE 19: Jane; and till the morrow, their going was deferred. Miss Bingley was
LINE 20: then sorry that she had proposed the delay, for her jealousy and dislike
LINE 21: of one sister much exceeded her affection for the other.
LINE 22: The master of the house heard with real sorrow that they were to go so
LINE 23: soon, and repeatedly tried to persuade Miss Bennet that it would not be
LINE 24: safe for her--that she was not enough recovered; but Jane was firm where
LINE 25: she felt herself to be right.
LINE 26: To Mr. Darcy it was welcome intelligence--Elizabeth had been at
LINE 27: Netherfield long enough. She attracted him more than he liked--and Miss
LINE 28: Bingley was uncivil to _her_, and more teazing than usual to himself.
LINE 29: He wisely resolved to be particularly careful that no sign of admiration
LINE 30: should _now_ escape him, nothing that could elevate her with the hope of
LINE 31: influencing his felicity; sensible that if such an idea had been
LINE 32: suggested, his behaviour during the last day must have material weight
LINE 33: in confirming or crushing it. Steady to his purpose, he scarcely spoke
LINE 34: ten words to her through the whole of Saturday, and though they were at
LINE 35: one time left by themselves for half an hour, he adhered most
LINE 36: conscientiously to his book, and would not even look at her.
LINE 37: On Sunday, after morning service, the separation, so agreeable to almost
LINE 38: all, took place. Miss Bingley's civility to Elizabeth increased at last
LINE 39: very rapidly, as well as her affection for Jane; and when they parted,
LINE 40: after assuring the latter of the pleasure it would always give her to
LINE 41: see her either at Longbourn or Netherfield, and embracing her most
LINE 42: tenderly, she even shook hands with the former.--Elizabeth took leave of
LINE 43: the whole party in the liveliest spirits.
LINE 44: They were not welcomed home very cordially by their mother. Mrs. Bennet
LINE 45: wondered at their coming, and thought them very wrong to give so much
LINE 46: trouble, and was sure Jane would have caught cold again.--But their
LINE 47: father, though very laconic in his expressions of pleasure, was really
LINE 48: glad to see them; he had felt their importance in the family circle. The
LINE 49: evening conversation, when they were all assembled, had lost much of its
LINE 50: animation, and almost all its sense, by the absence of Jane and
LINE 51: Elizabeth.
LINE 52: They found Mary, as usual, deep in the study of thorough bass and human
LINE 53: nature; and had some new extracts to admire, and some new observations
LINE 54: of thread-bare morality to listen to. Catherine and Lydia had
LINE 55: information for them of a different sort. Much had been done, and much
LINE 56: had been said in the regiment since the preceding Wednesday; several of
LINE 57: the officers had dined lately with their uncle, a private had been
LINE 58: flogged, and it had actually been hinted that Colonel Forster was going
LINE 59: to be married.